vi

Physicians of the School of Ātreya referred the surgical cases to surgeons
belonging to the School of Dhanwantari,¹ but there is no evidence of referring the
medical cases by the above surgeons to the physicians of the School of Ātreya.
It seems that only the clear surgical cases went to the surgeons who were able to
manage certain medical conditions too arisen as complications in those cases that
is why in the Suśruta Saṃhitā treatment of various medical conditions are also
described.

2. DATE OF THE CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ

Keeping in view the initial composition and further two redactions the present
text of the Caraka-saṃhitā can be analysed into three distinct layers which would
naturally relate to three different times. It would be futile and baseless if some-
body attempts to decide the date of the Caraka-saṃhitā as such. The safest course
would be to discuss the dates of Ātreya (the senior contemporary of Agniveśa),
Caraka and Dṛḍhabala which would throw light on development of the Caraka-
saṃhitā through different phases, the first one denoting the initial composition and
the last one the latest handling of the text.

ĀTREYA-AGNIVEŚA

Bhagawān Punarvasu Ātreya is the pivotal figure in the Caraka-saṃhitā. His
concepts are elaborated either in the form of dialogue with his favorite disciple,
Agniveśa, or while concluding the discussions as chairman in symposia.

Whether Ātreya received the tradition of Āyurveda from the sage Bharadwāja
or his father Atri is a common question. In the Sūtrasthāna of the Caraka-saṃhitā
it is said that the sages received the teachings from Bharadwāja (C.Sū. 1.27).
Here the particular name of Ātreya is conspicuously absent while in the other
context (C.Cu. 1.4.3) the name of Bharadwāja is not included in the list of sages
who approached Indra. The latter version is also corroborated by the Kāśyapa-
saṃhitā (p.61). Moreover, Bharadwāja is seen in opposition to Ātreya in one of the
symposia. Hence it seems more logical that Ātreya received his training in Āyurveda
from his father Atri. In the upaniṣads too a number of instances of sons receiving
instructions from their fathers are found.

Apart from Punarvasu Ātreya two other Ātreyas with different adjectives
such as Kṛṣṇātreya and Bhikṣu Ātreya are seen in the Caraka-saṃhitā. Kṛṣṇātreya
is mentioned once in the concluding verses (C.Sū. 11.63) in the Caraka-saṃhitā
and at two or three places in the Bhela Saṃhitā. In Mahābhārata too, Kṛṣṇātreya
is said as founder of the medical school. All this shows that 'Kṛṣṇa' was another
name of Ātreya in addition to that based on the name of a star (Punarvasu) at the
constellation of which perhaps he was born. But Kṛṣṇātreya quoted in the com-

C.Ci. 5. 44, 64, 13. 182, 14. 34.
