x

Thus Caraka stands between 7th Cent. B.C. and 6th Cent. A.D.
Internal evidences:
1. Many concepts like Kṣaṇikavijñāna, Svabhāvoparama, Upadhā etc. point
   towards the Buddhist doctrines which shows the appearance of Caraka in
   post-Buddhist period (after 5th Cent. B.C.)
2. Milindapahno (2nd Cent. B.C.) though not mentioning the name of Caraka
   explicitly has so many facts having resemblance to Caraka's description.¹
3. The Caraka-saṃhitā has referred to the earliest form of the Sāṃkhya philo-
   sophy which is older than the Sāṃkhyakārikā (200 A.D.).
4. The Caraka saṃhitā also precedes the Nyāyasūtra of Gautama (200 A.D.)
   because of having so many earlier informations.²

Thus on the basis of internal evidences Caraka stands between 5th Cent. B.C.
and 200 A.D.

In my opinion, Caraka may be placed near-about 200 B.C. somewhat earlier
than
Patañjali.³ The date of Mahābhāṣya and Yogasūtra being almost the same, all
the three authors were confused together regarding their identity.

Patañjali has mentioned several places of south India but Caraka has not
which shows the latter's unaquaintance with them and his position somewhat
anterior to the former.

Nāvanītaka (2nd Cent. A.D.) and other earlier or later works do not mention
Caraka which only shows that the treatise of Agniveśa even after redaction by
Caraka continued for centuries to have been known in the name of Agniveśa.
Vāgbhaṭa is the first author who mentions Caraka explicitly as the authoritive text
of the School of Medicine. Similarly, Bhaṭṭāra Hariścandra (6th Cen. A.D.) is the
first commentator on the Caraka saṃhitā.

ḌṚḌHABALA

Ḍṛḍhabala, son of Kapilabala⁴ and resident of Pañcanadapura⁵ reconstructed

1. Caraka-Cintana. p. 51.
2. Dasgupta: A History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. I, p. 301, Vol. II, p. 380, 392.
3. I think, the factors hindering perception were taken by both Mahābhāṣya and
   Sāṃkhyakārikā from Caraka. Das Gupta has missed this point. (see Ibid, Vol. I, p. 218)
4. Kapilabala is quoted by Vāgbhaṭa in the Aṣṭāṅga Saṃgraha. (Sū. 20, 21).
5. Pañcanadapura is identified a place in Kashmir or Punjab, Gaṅgādhara Roy takes it as
   a place (Pañcagaṅgā ghat) in Varanasi region.
