xiv

should be brought to the notice of the scholars and should draw their attention
towards the need of such a critical study. The errors may be due to oversight in
printing, editor's discretion in selecting the particular version and use of inadequate
number of random manuscripts for editing. The last reason has been responsible
for a number of anomalies in the text which created further confusion. Some of
these points will be discussed here.

1. While classifying the drugs, Caraka has described them as of three types-
   jāngama, bhauma and audbhida. Further also he has used the same terms but
   in the present edition the editor has preferred the version 'Pārthiva' instead
   of 'Bhauma' which does not seem to be reasonable.

2. Caraka has mentioned latex of three plants for evacuative purposes such as
   snuhi, arka and aśmantaka–the word 'kṣīra' (latex) is explicitly used with snuhi
   and arka but the same is absent with aśmantaka' which has led to several
   speculations and controversies regarding identity of the plant. Had there been
   'kṣīra' with aśmantaka it would have solved the problem to a great extent. In
   my opinion, the original version should have been "क्षमेऽस्मन्तकस्त्रि" instead
   "क्षमेऽस्मन्तक विधा". This is supported by the fact that the word kṣīra has been
   more than once in this context.²

3. In "मन्सिला लबड् झुटबात् सङ्कुष्ठा" (C.Sū. 3.15) the word "सङ्कुष्ठा" would be appro-
   priate in place of "सङ्कुष्ठा" because the root and not the bark of kuṣṭha is used.
   The present version means that bark is to be taken of kuṭaja alongwith kuṣṭha
   which is anomalous.

4. The idea of Caraka is that only knowing the plant by name or form is not
   sufficient but one should also be conversant with its therapeutic uses. Hence
   the version "योगाधिगतल्क्षणः" in the present edition (Sū. 1.122) is not appropriate
   because it does not convey the author's idea correctly.

5. In the group of anti-emetic drugs, the mention of 'yaṣṭika' (C.Sū. 4. 14) is not
   correct. It should have been 'saṭikā' as corroborated by its inclusion in fatigue-
   alleviating drugs alongwith other coread drugs (C.Sū. 4.16).

6. The reading "सहिकाञ् शलिमुद्गाश्च" (C.Sū. 5.12) though adopted by Cakrapāṇi
   does not seem to be reasonable. It should be शालिभिद्विमुद्गाश्च.

7. Caraka says that even the excessively heavy diet is not capable to pacify the
   (digestive) fire which is fuelled by fat (C.Sū. 13.71(a)). Here the version in
   the present edition is "स्नेहान्युद्धम्" which would be more befitting as "स्नेहाग्नित्वात्".
   Moreover, this line here is superfluous because it has been read in full
   elsewhere (C.Ci. 15.201).

१. क्षणेऽस्मन्तकं विधाय, मुनेर्होति विरेचने । क्षीरमेकत्र विक्षेपे यदने सारिरेचिने ॥ (C.Sū. 1. 115.)
२. C.Sū. 1. 119, 139
