XV

8.  The term 'upakrānta' has been used although in the sense of "treated" but at
    one place it is "anukrānta"¹ which seems to be an error. Similarly, at another
    place (C.Sū. 10.4) the editor has opted for 'anuṣṭhita' instead of 'upakrānta'
    which is also not proper.

9.  In over-obesity unctuous annointings and baths have been mentioned as
    etiological factors. Hence in over-leanness these should be contrary to the
    above such as non-unctuous annointings and abstinence from bath whereas the
    present version (C.Sū. 21.12) does not convey this idea.²

10. 'Āśinапracalāyitām' (C.Sū. 21. 20) this version even following by Carkrapāṇi
    does not seem to be correct. The correct version should be "āśinaṃ
    pracalayitam."³

11. In the introductory part of the chapter XXII (Sū.) "कुतःकृतितिगुणानां" should be
    corrected as "कुतःकृतितिगुणतानाम्"

12. The word 'Dhātu' denotes normalcy and as such it does not require any
    medicament. Hence in the present version "तद्वोषाणां पातनी" the word "धातुणी"
    should be replaced by "दोषाणी" as mentioned in footnote as alternative reading.

13. Caraka has invariably followed a definite order in placing the things. Hence
    any deviation observed should be taken as textual error. Judging from this
    criterion स्वरजातानां स्नेहानां (S. Sū. 25.30) should be "स्वर स्नेहानां similarly "आलुके
    कन्दानी" should be placed before "निकुर्ं फलानाम्" (C.Sū. 25. 39) because it is in
    contravention to the order followed in the preceding paragraph.

14. "लाभज्वकेशोरी" should be read as "लाभज्वकोशोरी" like "पास्यगुणी" in the preceding
    sentence (C.Sū. 25. 40).

15. "निर्घिः पुष्टिकराणाम्" (C.Sū. 25. 40) would be more befitting as "निर्घिः पुष्टिकराणाम्."

16. The word "निःसंशयकराणाम्" has been repeated (C.Sū. 25. 40) which has not been
    done in any other case and as such it seems to be an incorrect version. In my
    opinion, the version in the second place should be 'निर्भशकराणाम्' instead of
    'निःसंशयकराणाम्.'

17. In 'हिरण्यकः कौशिकः' the word "कौशिकः" should be read as "कुशिकः" that the name

1.  कृशतेन लघुमार्यः किमेव संभवेते पृष्टे ।
    'Tvanukrāntaḥ' should be as 'Tūpakrāntaḥ'.

2.  Here "स्थयोदनी" and "स्थानसम्यतः" should be substituted by "स्थपुदानी" and स्थानसम्यतः
    respectively.

3.  In 'आशनप्रसालीनां खातीन उपशयानाम् "अशब्द" and अतिनिद्रे these two adjectives relate to the two
    words 'Āśinam' and Pracalāyitam'. As in old code 'Āśinапracalāyitam',
    the above two adjectives contrary to each other would not fit there and become anomalous.
