xvi

of the sage was हिरण्याक्ष कुशिक is confirmed by his reference as such in the
preceding chapter (C.Sū. 25. 14-16). In fact, Kauśika has contradicted his
views and as such must be a different person belonging to his clan or may be
his son.

18. In "तत्समयदूतीलये स्वाः:" (C.Sū. 27. 25) the word "तत्समयः" should be replaced by
"तस्मयः"।

19. The word "बंगलावारिषः:" (C.Sū. 26. 55) though adopted by Cakrapāṇi does not
seem to be correct version. It should be बंगलावारिषः like जलवारिषः.

20. In description of vegetables also (C.Sū. 27), Caraka has followed an order. In
the end he has given the description of tubers but in the midst surprisingly the
description of "Sarsopa śāka" has come which is definitely a later interpolation
by some (Punjabi?) scholar fond of "Sarsoñ kā sāg".

21. "षष्णि मधुरे च वातितिक्ते च तास्मयौ" (C.Sū. 27. 128) here the repeated use of 'Ca' does
not seem to be proper. It should be "षातिनि प्रासम्यौ"।

22. "मधुफलमनुपाकिनि विचारशेषमदराणि च" (C.Sū. 27. 163) here "मधुफलमनुपाकिनि" should be
substituted for "मधुफलयनुपाकिनि" as indicated by Cakrapāṇi and from relevance
of the context "anupākini" means the fruits of the plant known as anupāki.

23. Caraka discusses the mode of nourishment of dhātus and malas by āhārarasa
and mala respectively. Looking to this the present version in the text seems
to be incorrect and needs to be rectified.¹

24. In nidāna of Kaphaja gulma (C. Ni. 3. 10) "स्तुपुसम" should be read as "स्तुपुसम"
because while hungry if one takes too much water it may cause kaphaja
gulma. This is corroborated by other texts as well. The word "स्वपुसम" does
not fit here.

25. In the chapter of prameha (C. Ni. 4. 10), there is one ikṣuvālikārasameha
among the ten types of kaphaja premeha but later while describing it, it is said
to cause passing of urine similar to the juice of kāṇḍekṣu. It looks anomalous
because ikṣuvālikā and kāṇḍekṣu have been mentioned separately (C.Sū. 25.
49, vi. 8. 135) and as such are different plants. The correct version should be
"इक्षवालीरसमेहाश्च" in place of "काण्डेक्षुरसमेहाश्च"।

26. In the treatment of gulma, there are some cūrṇa yogas (formulations of powders)
which have to be taken with some sour liquids. Here the word "शूलनाशहरी" should
be "शूलनाशहरा" because it qualifies the word "चूर्णीयाः". Here 'peyā' does not mean
"liquid gruel" but is a verbal form meaning "should be taken as drink".²

१. भावी सलाखाः: मलसञ्चयकर रसमस्याऽसृग् पृष्ठम्: should be read as भावः: प्रसञ्चरायः: मलसञ्चयकर रसमस्याऽसृग् पृष्ठम्।
२. न चूर्णीयाः:......। शूलनाशहरा पेया कक्षापुरसेन च । (C.Ci. 5. 76-77)
