xx

    Bhaṭṭāra was respected not only in the medical circle but due to his erudite
scholarship and genius as a poet he is remembered by Bāṇabhaṭṭa and Vākpatirāja
as an excellent prose-writer. His verses are quoted by Śrīdharadāsa and
Vallabhadeva. In Pādatāḍitaka, Hariścandra is said as a physician, son of Īśānacandra,
belonging to Kāṅkāyana family and resident of Bāhlīka.

2.  Svāmikumāra–He wrote 'Caraka-Pañjikā' on the lines of the commentary of
    Bhaṭṭāra Hariścandra. Perhaps he was a colleague of Bhaṭṭāra Hariścandra.

3.  Āṣādhavarmā–He is quoted by Jejjaṭa, Cakrapāṇi and Niścala Kara. He has
    written 'Parihāravārttika' commentary on the Caraka Saṃhitā.

4.  Kīrasvāmidatta–He has written 'Caraka-Vārttika' and is quoted by Jejjaṭa
    and Cakrapāṇi.

5.  Jejjaṭa–Jejjaṭa is the author of the commentary entitled 'Nirantarapada.
    Vyākhyā' which is unfortunately incomplete. He has also commented upon
    the Suśruta-saṃhitā and the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya. He is quoted by Vṛnda, Candraṭa,
    Gayadāsa, Cakrapāṇi, Dalhaṇa etc. and as such he is placed in 9th Cent
    A.D.

6.  Sudhīra–He was illustrious commentator on the Caraka Saṃhitā as well as
    the Suśruta-saṃhitā. He has been mentioned by Candraṭa as an authoritative
    commentator on Ayurveda alongwith Bhaṭṭāra Hariścandra and Jejjaṭa.

7.  Amitaprabha–He has authored a commentary on the Caraka-saṃhitā and is
    quoted by Candraṭa and Niścalakara.

8.  Svāmidāsa–He has been quoted by Cakrapāṇi.

9.  Bhāsadatta–He is quoted by Cakrapāṇidatta as a commentator on the Caraka-
    saṃhitā.

10. Brahmadeva–He wrote commentary on both the Caraka-saṃhitā and Suśruta-
    saṃhitā. He is quoted by Cakrapāṇi, Dalhaṇa, Śrīkaṇṭha Datta, Hemādri and
    Śivadāsa Sen.

11. Īśvarasena–He is quoted by Cakrapāṇi, Vijayarakṣita and Śrīkaṇṭhadatta.

12. Gayadāsa–He is the author of the Candrikā commentary on both the Caraka-
    saṃhitā and the Suśruta-saṃhitā and as such is famous as 'Candrikā-kāra'
    (author of Candrikās). Gayadāsa has quoted Jejjaṭa¹ and himself is quoted by
    Dalhaṇa. Gayadāsa and Cakrapāṇi do not quote each other. Hence he is
    placed in the 11th Cent. A.D. as a contemporary of Cakrapāṇi.

___________
1. Both Bhaṭṭāra and Jejjaṭa are commentators of Caraka-saṃhitā, hence by association
   Sudhīra also seems to have commented upon it.
