xxiii

3. Organisation of symposia :

    For advancement of knowledge and research they adopted the method of discussion among experts. Symposia were organised in different parts of the country in which experts of the subject participated¹. These participants placed their views freely often contradicting the other's view. Lord Atreya is seen presiding over these symposia who concluded often correlating all the views. The workers and authors presented their work in the conference of expert scholars and it was only after their approval that the works were recognised by the academic circle. This method of mutual discussion and symposia was responsible for developing the broader scientific outlook which led to the study of problems from various angles to arrive at the truth.

4. Psychosomatic approach :

    Caraka-saṃhitā holds the synthetic view of man instead of analysing him into hundreds of parts and reducing him as aggregate of tiny cells. Happiness and unhappiness are the final consequence of health and disease respectively and these affect the person wholly and not partly. Tridoṣa as well as psyche pervade the whole body, therefore in health and disease one will have to consider the person as a whole who is known as 'Puruṣa' in Āyurveda. This gave rise to the psychosomatic approach towards health and disease. Tridoṣa and psyche interact with each other and as such the disorders will have to be viewed accordingly. This 'deha-mānasa' (psychosomatic) approach is a very important contribution of the Caraka saṃhitā in the field of medicine. Mind effects body and vice versa. Hence any partial veiw can not lead to proper understanding and successful management of the problems. Alongwith the 'Yuktvyapāśraya' treatment 'Sattvāvajaya'² (Psychotherapy) has also been given due place.

5. Individual constitution :

    Side by side with the formulation of general concepts, Caraka had laid proper emphasis on individual psychic and somatic constitution. Man is not a machine and as such is to be operated equally with a uniform law. Every person has got his own individuality and normal variations. This forms his constitution which distinguishes him from other individuals. This is termed as 'Prakṛti'. Every regimen or therapy has to be applied keeping in view the constitution of the concerned person³ and his suitability (sātmya). The modern concept of allergy, anaphylaxis or idiosyncrasy may be interpreted on the basis of this old idea of prakṛti.

1. C.Sū. 1, 12, 25, 26;Sā. 6, Si. 11.
2. Ca. Sū. 11, 52.
3. योगमास्तु यो विधाद् देशकालोपयादिताम्। पुरुषं पुरुषं वीक्ष्य स देयो विचयुः॥ (C.Sū. 1, 124)
