xxvi

people but because of its voluminousness and limited number of copies available
now it is not within easy reach of the scholars*.

Another edition of the Caraka-samhitā with English translation of the text and
the Cakrapāṇi's commentary by R.K. Sharma and Bhagwan Dash came out from
the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, Varanasi. Two volumes have since been
published (1976, 1977) covering upto Indriyasthāna. Thus it is incomplete by half.

9. THE PRESENT EDITION

Looking to the above facts and the gradually increasing curiosity to know
about Indian Medicine all over the world, it was felt necessary to bring forth an
edition of the Caraka-samhitā with a faithful and literal English translation after
carefully editing the original text. Utmost care has been taken to see that this
objective is fulfilled and the entire subject is put in such a concise style that it
carries the full purport of the text but at the same time does not transgress the limit
so that it can be handled and grasped conveniently by the scholars interested in
the study of Āyurveda.

Certain terms have been kept as such in the translation with the idea that the
connotation of the term may not be distorted. A glossary of such and other technical
terms including disease-names would be appended in the end. The plant-names
also have been given as such; a complete list of the plant with botanical names
will be given in the appendix. Other useful appendices will also be added.

I have tried my best to present the ideas of the Caraka-samhitā in faithful
manner but it is for the scholars to judge how far I have been sincere to the task.
I hope, this edition would inspire the students of the Caraka samhitā all over the
world to dive deep and deep into the fathomless ocean of the knowledge of Āyus.

I express my heartly thanks and congratulations to the young publishers, who
are devoted sincerely to the noble cause of propagating the misson of Caraka all
over the world, for bringing out this novel edition of the Caraka-samhitā particularly
in these difficult times for the press. I wish they constantly march on this pious
path.

39, Gurudham Colony,
Varanasi.                                                     P.V. Sharma
August 15, 1981.

* Now this Book is Published by Chaukhambha Orientalia, Varanasi
