6                                    CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                                    [CH.

were properly composed. All praised them, the benefactors of all creatures, alongwith
the loud applause for the compassion on creatures. These (loud) virtuous words of
the great sages were heard by the godly sages and gods living in heaven and they
were extremely delighted. The deep and affectionate sound of 'well done' expressed
by the creatures with happiness in the sky resounded the three worlds. The pleasant
wind began to blow, all corners blossomed with lustre and there were divine showers
of flowers and water. Then the goddesses of knowledge Buddhi (intelligence), Siddhi
(success), Smṛti (memory), Medhā (intellect), Dhṛti (restraint), Kīrti (fame), Kṣamā
(forbearance) and Dayā (kindness) entered into Agnivesa etc. Thus their compendi-
ums approved by the great sages were established on (strong) footing for the welfare
of the creatures. [32-40]

हिताहितं सुखं दुःखमायुस्तस्य हिताहितम् । मानं च तच्च यत्रोक्तमायुर्वेदः स उच्यते ।।४१।।

Āyurveda is that which deals with good, bad, happy and unhappy life, its pro-
moters and non-promoters, measure and nature]. [41]

शरीरेन्द्रियसत्त्वात्मसंयोगो धारि जीवितम् । नित्यगश्चानुबन्धश्च पर्यायैरायुरुच्यते ।।४२।।

'Āyus' means the conjunction of body, sense organs, mind and self and is known
by the synonyms dhāri, jīvita, nityaga and anubandha. [42]

तस्यायुः पुण्यतमो वेदो वेदविद्यां मतः । यत्रायुः चतुष्पाणां लोकेऽथोऽपमयोविधम् ।।४३।।

The scholars of Vedas regard the Veda of that Āyus as the most virtuous one
which is said as good for both the worlds for the human beings. [43]

सर्वदा सर्वभावानां सामान्यं वृद्धिकारणम् । ह्रासहेतुर्विशेषश्च, प्रवृत्तिरुभयस्य तु ।।४४।।

Similarity of all substances is always the cause of increase and dissimilarity the
cause of decrease. Both effect by their application. [44]

सामान्यन्येकत्वकारणं, विशेषेण वृथक्वकृत् । तुल्यार्थता हि सामान्यं, विशेषस्तु पृथक्त्वः ।।४५।।

Similarity brings unity while dissimilarity causes diversity. Again, similarity
carries the sense of 'equal' while dissimilarity is opposite. [45]

सत्त्वात्ममनः शरीरं च चतुष्पादमिदमुच्यते । सोऽयुक्तश्च तथा भूयात् यस्मिन्नयमनुबध्यते ।।४६।।
स पुमांश्चेतन स्तत्र भवत्यायुर्वेदसंश्रयः ।

Mind, self and body-these three make a tripod on which the living world stands.
All depend on this (living world). That (living body) is Puruṣa (person), sentient and
location of this Veda (Ayurveda). For him alone, this Veda is brought to light. [46-47]

खादीन्यात्मा मनः कालो दिशश्च इत्यभिदंशः । सदैव चेतनं द्रव्यं, सत्त्वं वेतनरहितम् ।।४८।।

In short, ākāśa etc. (ākāśa, vāyu, tejas, ap and pṛthivī), self, mind, time and
space are dravyas (substances) having sense organ is sentient while that
without it is insentient. [48]

सार्थे मुमुक्षवे बुद्धिः प्रयत्नात्मा परादयः । गुणाः प्रोक्ताः प्रयत्नादि धर्म चेष्टितमुच्यते ।।४९।।
