II                              SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    7

    Sense objects (śabda, sparśa, rūpa, rasa, gandha), properties beginning with
guru¹, knowledge, qualities ending with prayatna² and beginning with para³ are called
gunas. The movement iniated by effort is called karma (action). [49]

समवायोऽसंभावायां भूयादीनां गुणैः । स नित्यो यत् हि द्रव्यं न समवायत्यो गुणः ।।५०।।

    Samavāya (inherence) is the inseparableness of pṛthivī etc. (dravya) with
their gunas (properties). This is eternal because no dravya (substance) is devoid of
property. [50]

यत्रास्थितः कारणगुः कारणं समवायि यत् । तद्द्रव्यं समवायि तु निद्धेः कारणं गुणः ।।५१।।

    That (dravya) in which properties and actions are located and which is the
material cause (of its effect). Guna (property) is related with inherence (to dravya),
is devoid of action and is (asamavāyi-non-inherent) cause (of its effect). [51]

संयोगे च विभागे च कारणं इव्यमास्थितम् । कर्तव्यस्य क्रिया कर्म कर्म नान्यद्पेक्षते ।।५२।।

    The causative factor in conjunction and disjunction, located in dravya and
performance of that to be done is karma (action). Karma does not require another
factor. [52]

इत्युक्तं कारणं कार्यं धातुसाम्यमिहोद्धेशतः । धातुसाम्यक्रिया चोक्ता सत्वा तदन्वयस्य प्रयोजनम् ।।५३।।

    Thus described the cause. Now the effect, dhātusāmya, is discussed here because
the object of this compendium is achievement of dhātusāmya (equilibrium of sustain-
ing and nourishing factors). [53]

कालबुद्धिइन्द्रियार्थानां योगो हिम्या च वाति च । इत्वाश्रयाणां व्याधीनां त्रिविधो हेतुसंग्रहः ।।५४।।

    Perverted, negative and excessive use of time, intellect and sense objects is the
threefold cause of both psychic and somatic disorders. [54]

शरीरं सत्त्वसंज्ञं च व्याधीनाश्रयो मतः । तथा सुखानां, योगेषु सुखानां कारणं समः ।।५५।।

    Both body and mind are the locations of disorders as well as pleasures. The bal-
anced use is the cause of pleasures. [55]

निर्विकारः परस्त्वात्मा सत्त्वभूतगुणेन्द्रियैः । चैतन्ये कारणं नित्यो द्रष्टा पश्यति हि क्रियाः ।।५६।।

    The supreme self is Changeless, is the cause of consciousness with the
conjunction of mind, properties of bhūtas⁴ and sense organs, is eternal and seer who
sees all the actions. [56]

1. Guru-laghu, śīta-uṣṇa, snigdha-rūkṣa, manda-tīkṣṇa, slakṣṇa-khara, sāndra-drava,
   mṛdukathina, sthira-sāra, sūkṣma-sthūla, viśada-picchila (20).
2. icchā, dveṣa, sukha, duḥkha, prayatna (5).
3. Para-apara, yukti; Sāṅkhyā: Samyoga, Vibhāga, Pṛthaktva, Parimāṇa, saṃskāra, abhyāsa (10).
4. Bhūtas are five-pṛthivī, ap, tejas, vāyu and ākāśa. Their properties respectively are gandha,
   rasa, rūpa, sparśa and śabda.
