12                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH.

urine is slightly alkaline, laxative and alleviates piles, śopha and udara. Elephant
urine is salty, beneficial for patients of krimi and kuṣṭha and commended for retention
of urine and faeces, poisons, disorders of kapha and piles. Camel urine is slightly
bitter, destroyer of dyspnoea, cough and piles. Horse urine is bitter-pungent and
destroyer of kuṣṭha, wounds and poisons. Ass urine is destroyer of epilepsy, insanity
and grahas (seizures). Thus urines are described here according to potency and
application. [92-104]

अतः क्षीरिणां पशूनाम् कर्म वाचां गुणाश्च मे ।।१०५।।
अविकीरणगजाश्विनी गोक्षीरं मारिचं च मत् । उष्ट्रोणाश्वयं गर्दभीनं षड्भागाः विधास्यन्ते ।।१०६।।
शारदायी मधुरं शीतलं स्निग्धं दश्यं पयः। श्रीणां बृंहणं गुरुणं सेव्यं बल्यं मनस्करम् ।।१०७।।
जीवनीयं क्षयहरं शास्त्रकानिर्वापणम् । हरते श्रोणिविकारान् च सर्वाणि विषलक्षण ब् ।।१०८।।
सर्वप्राणभृतां पथ्यं दोषत्रयानिर्वापणम् । पुरीषं पवनं हन्याद् रक्तस्य च विशेषात् ।।१०९।।
यामदृग्निमेधावितं च शिशोः गुल्मश्चरो। अपिशिते स्त्रवते हैदैः हर्षात् दृष्टवत् विशेषतः ।।११०।।
योनिपुरुषप्रदेशे पुरीषं पवनं मांसात् पवनं शोषकारी च। विरेचनं स्नेहश्चर्यापान्निकेतनम् ।।१११।।
मस्यालोपनाशिनेकेरू अणुनाशिक्यो.जेन्द्रभवरतिविनाशनम् । विरेचनं स्नेहश्चर्यापान्निकेतनम् ।।११२।।
यथाकर्म तु क्षीराणीकेद्य.जोभयाधिकारिकम् । अजवातेक्षेत्र जनु शुष्य भुवो बक्ष्यापुक्षाम् ।।११३।।

Now milks will be described and also their properties and actions. The milks are
of sheep, she-goat, cow, she-buffalo, she-camel, she-elephant, mare and women. In
general, milk is sweet, unctuous, cold, galactogogue, refreshing, promotes body
weight, semen, intellects strength and mental ability, is vitaliser, fatigue-alleviating,
destroyer of dyspnoea, cough and innate haemorrhage; union-promoting in injuries,
whole-some for all living beings, pacifier (of dosas), eliminator (of malas), destroyer
of thirst and appetiser. This is the most useful in kṣīna (wasting), kṣata (injuries),
anaemia, acid gastritis, Consumption, gaseous tumor, abdominal enlargement,
diarrhoea, fever, burning sensation, oedema, specifically in dis- orders of female
genital tract and semen, deficiency of urine, hardened stool and disorders of vāta
and pitta. Milk is everywhere used in snuffing, pasting, bathing, emesis, non-unctuous
enema, purgation and unction. (I) will describe again the properties of individual
milks separately in order in the chapter of food and drinks fully. [105-113]

अथापरे त्रयो वृक्षाः पृथग्वते फलमूलिनः । स्नुहीऽर्काश्मन्तकास्तेपि भिन्नाः फलिन्यः ।।११४।।
अश्मन्तेऽज्ञानलिः क्षीरं स्नुहीक्षीरिके विरेचने। श्रीमतोऽज्ञानलिस्तु विरेचने विश्वे च विरेचने ।।११५।।

Now there are other three trees—snuhi, arka and āśmantaka which are different
from the plants of phalinī and mūlinī groups. Aśmantaka is known for emesis, latex
of snuhi for purgation and that of arka for both emesis and purgation. [114-115]

प्रमाणीनारां पृक्षाग्रभूतेरिति स्तितस्वखम् । पृत्थीः पुरीषेण क्षुत्पानाय तथा रतः ।।११६।।
विरेचने प्रयोक्तव्यः पृत्थीक्षितिल्वकञ्चनम् । क्षुत्पान्यया परितेति शौषधर्चेषु चोक्तवते ।।११७।।
