II]	SŪTRASTHĀNA	17

पृष्ठोकांसरिवालापायिपसोलमुनागरैः । पिप्पलानी, विफण्ली व सौपरजीविकायिता ।।२४।।
That prepared with drākṣā, sārivā, parched paddy, pippalī, honey and śuṇṭhī
alleviates (excessive) thirst. The one cooked with somarājī is anti-poison. [24]

सिद्ध सरादिनिगृहे यवागूगुरुमी मत । गवेधुकानां भुशानां कार्तीया समावशिया ।।२५।।
The gruel prepared with pork juice is bulk-promoting. The one prepared with
fried gavedhuka along with honey is emaciating. [25]

सार्पिणी बहुतिला स्नेहनी लवणांयाशा । कृशामालकनिंधुरे त्यामाकानां विकड़गणी ।।२६।।
The gruel prepared with profuse sesamum and added with ghee and salt provides
unctuousness. The one of śyāmāka prepared with decoction of kuśa and āmalaka
produces roughness. [26]

दशमूलीगृता कालादिकाशाशकापहा । यमके मदिरासिका पाककाव्यनपाहा ।।२७।।
The one prepared from ten roots¹ alleviates cough, hiccup, dyspnoea and kapha.
The one prepared with dual fat (ghee and oil) along with madirā (wine) alleviates pain
in colon. [27]

शक्रैमांसिलसैमनैः सिद्ध यर्वो निरचयति । जम्ब्राश्वरस्थविधायिमाशतिवैले: । साहुनिकी मत ।।२८।।
The gruel prepared with potherbs, meat, sesamum and black gram evacuates bowels.
That (prepared) with seeds of jambū and āmra (mango), sour kapittha and bilwa is
astringent. [28]

क्षारविकक्षिडायणयावसैर्तमेदिनी मत । अभयापिप्पलिमूललिलुटितंटोलेनी ।।२९।।
The gruel with yavakṣāra (alkali obtained from barley plant), citraka, hiṅgu
and amlavetasa is mass-breaking. The one with harītakī, pippalīmūla and śuṇṭhī helps
carmination (passing of flatus). [29]

तक्रसिद्धा यवागू स्वाद घृतव्यापिपयाभिनी । तैलस्यापदि सत्त्यात् शस्ता स्यातांपिपयाकतासिका ।।३०।।
The gruel prepared with buttermilk relieves of untoward effects caused by (ex-
cessive intake of) ghee. The one prepared with buttermilk and sesame paste is useful
in conditions caused by (excessive intake of) oil. [30]

गव्यगिरसर्जी: सालग विचयभस्तरातिसृग्री । कण्ठ्या यवानां कृता भूप्त पिप्पल्यामलकैर्युता । गृता ।।३१।।
The gruel prepared with beef juice and soured with pomegranates alleviates in-
termittent fevers. The one prepared from barley in ghee and oil with pippalī and āmalaka
is useful for throat. [32]

तांडुदरसे सिद्धा तोलमार्कलवासा । समापविलसा घृषा पूतिहरीरसाविभिता ।।३३।।
That prepared in chicken juice alleviates pain in seminal passage. That with split
black grams prepared in ghee and milk is aphrodisiac. [32]

1. bilwa, agnimantha, śyonāka, gambhārī, pāṭalā, śālaparṇī, pṛśniparṇī, bṛhatī, kaṇṭakārī
and gokṣura. The first five are called as bigger roots (bṛhat pañcamūla) and the latter one
as smaller roots (laghu pañcamūla). Both together make daśamūla (ten roots).

8 C.S.-I
