20                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH.

Kustha, both (types of) haridrā, tulasī, patola, nimba, aśwagandhā, devadāru,
śigru, sarsapa, tumburu, dhānyaka, kaivarta mustaka and candā should be powdered
in equal quantity. These ground with buttermilk should be used for anointing the
body already smeared with oil. By this itching, boils, urticarial patches, skin diseases
and (various types of) oedema are alleviated. [8-9]

कुष्ठागुरासुकटड्डेरीकासीसकम्पिल्लकमुस्तालोधम्।
सौगन्धिक सर्जरसो विडङ्गं मन:शिलालं करञ्जीरकल्काः ।।१०।।
तैलाक्तशरीरे कृत्तानि चूर्णि-नेत्रे दद्रुदावविसर्पनाशने ।
दद्रु: सकण्डू: किटिभानि पाम विचर्चिकां चैव तथैते शमितुम् ।।११।।

Kustha, tuttha (copper sulphate), dāruharidrā, kāsīsa, kampillaka, musta, lodhra,
sulphur, rāla, vidaṅga, realgar, orpiment and bark of karavīra–these powdered should
be prescribed for dusting on the body smeared with oil. Thus ringworm, itching, kijibha,
papular eruptions and eczema are relieved. [10-11]

मन:शिलालं मरिचानि तैलवार्के पः कुष्ठतः प्रदेहः ।
तुत्थं विडङ्गं मरिचानि कुष्ठं छोङ्ग च सद्रू: समनः शिश स्नुत् ।।१२।।

Realgar, orpiment, marica, (mustard) oil and latex of arka (plant) mixed together
make a paste for (alleviating) skin diseases. Similar is (that) prepared with copper
sulphate, vidaṅga, marica, kustha, lodhra and realgar. [12]

रसाञ्जन समपुनर्नवीर्यं पूर्णं कार्पासास्य रसेन लेप: ।
करञ्जबीजगत्सं सकृष्ठो गोमूत्रेण च पर: प्रदेह: ।।१३।।

Rasāñjana and seed of cakramarda mixed with juice of kapittha make a paste (for
the same). Similar is the paste of karañja seeds, cakramarda and kustha ground with
cow's urine. [13]

उभे हरिद्रे कुटजस्य बीजं करञ्जबीजं सुमन:प्रासादम् ।
लवणं सम्यक् हरमाचाकस्य लेपं तिलशारुरुगं विद्ध्यात् ।।१४।।

Both (types of) haridrā, kutaja seeds, karañja seeds, tender leaves of jātī,
bark and pith of karavīra mixed with alkali of sesamum make a paste (for skin
diseases). [14]

मन:शिला लवङ्ग कुटजात्सं सकृष्ठाः सैन्धवज्यास्तुरूषः ।
अग्निज भर्जः करञ्जीरुगैलं सामानि सान्यानि तुण्डीकेशु ।।१५।।
पलाशचित्रकिरसेन चापि करञ्जिगुहान-स्वकर्पणिचैव ।
द्वीपिश्रेयं प्रदहति लेपयेन्मां च कुष्ठिसुदुस्तयाः ।।१६।।

Realgar, kutaja bark, kustha, kāsīsa, cakramarda, karañja, bhūrja node and karavīra
roots each 10 gm.–powder of all these should be cooked with tusodaka (a type
of vinegar) and the juice obtained from burning the palāśa roots in ādhaka quantity
