III]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                          21

(2.56 litres) till ruduced to semi-solid state. The preparation is used as paste for alle-
viating skin diseases. [15-16]

पयसि पिक्ष्वा चतुरुलस्य तकेण पयापिन्धः काकमाच्याः ।
तैलाक्तागस्य नरस्य कुष्ठानुदेशेषुलेपनश्चौकैः ।।१७।।

After grinding the leaves of āragvadha and kākamācī with butter milk, and also
with the leaves of karavīra; the body of the person smeared with oil should be annointed
(in parts affected with) skin diseases. [17]

कोलं कुलत्थाः सुदारादशमामाषातसीतीलफलानि कुष्ठम् ।
वचा शताह्वा वक्षुपर्णीसमयुग्धाति सांतापमिति वातेः ।।१८।।

Badara, kulattha, devadāru, rāsnā, black gram, linseed, oily seeds (castor etc.)
kuṣṭha, vacā, śatapuṣpā, barley powder mixed up with vinegar and heated make a
useful paste for those suffering from vātika disorders. [18]

आनूपजलाभिसमेदोवर्त्तयः प्रदेहः पयःपायस- स्याः ।
स्नेहैडत्रुभिर्मांसरसेभिर्गन्धापहः प्रदेहः ।।१९।।

The hot vesavāra (a preparation) with meat of marshy animals and fish
makes a paste for alleviating vāta. Similarly, the paste prepared with four fats (ghee,
oil, muscle fat and marrow), ten roots and aromatic drugs is destroyer of vāta. [19]

तकेण मुक्तं वक्षुपर्णीयुतं सहाग्निकी जठरे नित्यम् ।
कुष्ठं शताह्वा वचायं श्यामो बृहि सतैलक्षारमुक्तिने वाते ।।२०।।

Barley powder mixed with buttermilk, heated and added with alkali removes
pain in abdomen. Kuṣṭha, śatapuṣpā, vacā and barley powder mixed with oil and
vinegar is prescribed in vāta. [20]

उभे शताह्वे मधुकं मधुकं बलां प्रियालां च काशेरुकं व ।
पूगे विदारी च सितोपलया च कुयाति प्रदेहे पयने वातरक्ते ।।२१।।

Both (types of) śatapuṣpā, madhuyaṣṭi, mādhūka, balā, priyāla, kāśeruka, vidārī
mixed with ghee and sugarcandy should be used as paste in vātarakta. [21]

राना गुदूची मधुकं बले हे रसोनेश सर्षवेश पद्म ।
पृते च सिद्धं मधुसेचकं शर्षिकापतिं प्रयुक्ते: ।।२२।।

Ghee prepared with rāsnā, guḍūcī, madhuyaṣṭi, both (types of) balā, jīvaka,
ṛṣabhaka alongwith milk and added with bee-wax is used as paste for alleviating dis-
comfort in raktavāta. [22]

वाते सर्पिः सयूगं प्रदेहो गोदुग्धयुग्धं छागलीपयश्च ।
नालोवाचं वचनकुष्ठपुषंः शिरोरोगाणां सयूगं प्रदेहः ।।२३।।

In vātarakta, wheat flour mixed with goat's milk and ghee is used as paste. In
headache, tagara, utpala, candana and kuṣṭha mixed with ghee is used as paste. [23]

प्रपौण्डरीकं सुरदारु कुष्ठं शतकुड्मलेना कमलोत्पले च ।
शिरोरोगाणां सयुः प्रदेहो गोमेद्रकाच्यवभोकैश्च ।।२४।।

Prapauṇḍarīka, devadāru, kuṣṭha, madhuyaṣṭi, elā, kamala, utpala, aguru, erakā,
padmaka and coraka mixed with ghee make a paste for headache. [24]
