22                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ

रास्ना हरिद्रे जलदं शताहे दे देवदारुणि सितापुष्पं च ।
जीवनिमुलौ सपुनं सतैलमालेपनं पार्श्वरुजासु कोष्णम् ।।२५।।

Rāsnā, two (types of) haridrā, jāṭāmāṃsī, two (types of) śatapuṣpā, devadāru,
jīvantī roots and sugarcandy mixed with ghee and oil are used as warm paste in pain
in sides (of the chest). [25]

शैवालपण्डोपवेतदुरूप्रपौण्डरीकवचामुणालालोद्रम् ।
प्रियङ्गुकालेयकचन्दनानि निर्वाणः स्वासु सुषूः प्रदेहः ।।२६।।

Śāivāla, kamala, utpala, vetra, punnāga, prapauṇḍarīka, uśīra, lodhra, priyaṅgu,
kāleyaka and candana mixed with ghee make a heat-alleviating paste. [26]

सितातागरतगरथामनि यवासामुण्डी चलिनि वृषा ।
यवासमूलं कुशकाशयोश्च निर्वाणः स्वाञ्जनरेवका च ।।२७।।

Svetā māñjiṣṭhā, vetasa, padmaka, madhuyaṣṭi, aindrī, kamala, dūrvā,
roots of yavaśa, kūśa and kaśā, hrībera and erakā are (also used as) heat-
alleviating (paste). [27]

शैलेयमेलागुरुकुष्ठं सकुष्ठं सफलं सुरदारु रास्ना ।
सर्पी सिंहास्यादिप्रदेशो विषं शिरीषेण सिंहवुरम् ।।२८।।

Śaileya, elā, aguru, kuṣṭha, caṇḍā, tagara, tvak, devadāru, rāsnā-these together
used as paste alleviate cold in no time. Śirīṣa alongwith sindhuvāra counter acts
poisons. [28]

शिरीषलामाजकं नागकेशरं लोद्रम–रुब्धं शरीरगन्धस्वेदोः प्रपयः ।
पत्राम्बुलोध्राभरवचन्दनानि शरीरदुर्गन्धनिवर्तनः स्वेदः ।।२९।।

Śirīṣa, lāmājjaka, nāgakeśara, lodhra-when rubbed together (over the skin), alle-
viate skin diseases and excessive perspiration.
Patra, hrībera, lodhra, uśīra and candana make a paste for alleviating foul smell
of the body. [29]

तत्र श्लोकः—

इहाग्निशिः सिद्धसमगुवाच भ्राजिसन्ते सिद्धमहर्षिपूज्यः ।
चूर्णानुलेपांश्च विविधान्वातनाशार्थी जगतो हिताय ।।३०।।

Now (the summing up) verses-
Here, Atri’s son, worshipped by accomplished and great sages mentioned thirty
two successful powder- pastes, destroyers of various disorders, in the chapter of
āragvadha etc. for the welfare of the world. [30]

इत्यारघवाद्यकृते तत्रे रचप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने आरग्वधादीनां नाम तृतीयोऽध्यायः ।।३।।

Thus ends the third chapter on āragvadha etc. in Ślokasthāna in the treatise com-
posed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. [3]
