पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER V

अथातो माज्ञाशितीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः । ११।।
Now (I) shall expound the chapter on quantity of diet etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह पुनर्वसुरात्रेयः। ११२।।
As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

माज्ञाशी स्यात् । आहारमात्रां पुनरग्निबलापेक्षिणीं ११३।।
One should take food in (proper) quantity. This quantity of food depends on the power of digestion. [3]

याद्रूप्यशनमात्रमुपयुक्तं कृतिं यथाकालं जरां गच्छति तावत्परमां मात्रामेतां वेदितव्यं भवति ।।४।।
Whatever quantity of food taken gets digested in time without disturbing the normalcy should be regarded as the measure of (proper) quantity. [4]

तत् शालिषष्टिकमुद्गलावकपिञ्जलशारशारम्भारद्रव्याणां शस्यमाणानां द्रव्याणां प्रकृतिलघुनामपि माज्ञामेषिणी भवति ।
तथा पिष्टसुक्षौरविकृतिशालूकपूलीधान्याम्लद्रव्याणां प्रकृतिगुरूणामपि मात्रामेषिणी ११५।।
Thus the articles of food such as śāli, ṣaṣṭika (rice), mudga (pulse), lāva, kapiñjala, ena, śaśa, śarabha, śambara (meats) etc. even though light by nature depend on quantity. Similarly, those such as preparations of flour, sugarcane, milk, sesamum, black gram, marshy and aquatic meats even though heavy in digestion by nature also depend on the quantity itself [5]

न चैतदपि द्रव्ये गुरुलाघवमेव कारणं मन्येत, लघुनि हि द्रव्याणि वाय्वग्निगुणबहुलानि भवन्ति;
पृथिवीसोमगुणबहुलानीतराणि, तस्माद्वायुरग्निगुणप्रधानत्वाल्लघूनि द्रव्याणि भोजनेऽपि तृप्तिमापि
मुख्येर्हि पुनर्गुरूणां विपरीतभावात् तृप्तिकृन्न विकारकृत् सोऽयं विभागो भविष्यति; तीव्र
चलाभिघाताद्यागमभावा-व्यायामाग्निबलसत्त्वसंपन्नानामतिमात्रमपि गुरूणां न विकारकारणं भवति; तीव्र
चलाभिघाताद्यागमभावात् मात्रावद्गुरूणि माज्ञा ११६।।
By this, it should not be confused that lightness and heaviness in (food) articles are quite inert. In fact, light articles are predominant in properties of vāyu and agni while others (heavy ones) are the same in those of pṛthivī and soma (ap). So by dint of their properties, the light articles being stimulant of digestion, even taken upto the saturation point, produce little derangement. (On the contrary) the heavy articles because of dissimilarity, are not stimulant of digestion by nature and thus cause considerable derangement if taken upto the saturation point except in case (of persons having) physical exercise and (adequate) strength of agni (digestion). Hence, the quantity (of food) is related to agnibala (power of digestion). [6]
