34                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH.

secretion. The vision is predominant in tejas and as such is specially susceptible to
kapha. Hence the measures alleviating kapha are beneficial for clarifying the vision.
A sharp collyrium should not be applied to eyes at day because the vision already
weak due to evacuation is further depressed in the sun. Hence it is desirable certainly
that the evacuative collyrium be applied only at night. [15-17]

यथा हि कनकादीनि मलिनानि विधिप्रतापात् ॥ ११८॥
शौतानां निर्मला शुद्धिरतैलवस्त्रादिभिः । एवं नेत्रेषु मर्त्यानामक्ष्णांतमोऽभिधिः ॥ ११९॥
दर्शिनिर्मलभा मिलति नयनीयुक्त् ।

As various types of metals like gold etc. when dirty become stainlessly clean
after washing with oil, cloth, and hair (brush) etc., the vision in eyes of the mortal
ones brightens undisturbed like moon in the clear sky by (application of) collyrium,
eye drops etc. [18-19]

हरेणुकां पियङ्गां पृथ्वीकां केसारं नखम् ॥ २०॥
ह्रीवेरं चन्दनं पत्रं त्वगेलामुशीरमेव च । पद्मकं ध्यामकं मधुकं मांसीं गुग्गुलुमागुरुम् ॥ २१॥
न्यग्रोधोदुम्बराश्वत्थप्लक्षाणां लोध्रवल्कलम् । यन्यां सर्जरसं मुस्तां शैलेयं च समापिबेत् ॥ २२॥
श्रीवेष्टकं शल्लकीं च स्थाुनेयकं विशेषतः । पिष्ट्वा लिम्पेच्छरीवेष्ट्यां या याति यवसंस्थितिम् ॥ २३॥
अङ्गुलीभिरथाष्टाभिर्विपर्यासेन मापयेत् । नेत्रकाण्डप्रविष्टस्य धिषणं धूपयेद्वशम् ॥ २४॥

Harenukā, piyaṅgu, pṛthvīkā, kesāra, nakha, hrībera, candana, patra, tvak, elā,
uśīra, padmaka, dhyāmaka, madhuka, māṃsī, guggulu, aguru, śarkārā, bark of
nyagrodha, udumbara, aśvattha, plakṣa and lodhra, yanyā, sarjarasa, mustā, śāileya,
kamala, utpala, śrīveṣṭaka, śallakī and sthauṇeyaka — all these should be ground and
pasted on a reed so as to make it a stick, barley-shaped, thumb-like and of eight
fingers in length. The person should take this stick when dried and with free interior,
put it on the smoking pipe and having added some fat and ignited should smoke as a
daily routine for happiness. [20-24]

बस्यागुणसम्पूर्णोधूपितुनावनीर्थितः ॥ २५॥
वर्तिं मधुरेः कृत्वा स्नेहेनेव मूम्पायदे ।

One should use unctuous smoking with stick made of useful drugs of sweet group
added properly with fat, ghee and bee-wax. [25]

श्वेता ज्योतिष्मती चैव हरितालेन नागरः ॥ २६॥
नयनाम्पुरकस्यापि मूर्ध्नि धूपेन विधीयते ।

For evacuation of head, the smoking made of śveta, jyotiṣmatī, orpiment, realgar
and the aromatic substances (of agurvādya guṇa — see ci. 3.267) beginning with aguru
and patra (leaving kuṣṭha and tagara) should be used. [26]
