VI                               SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    35

पुत्रिःग्लानमग्नन्धः दन्तशूलरोचकः । इन्द्रयोपघातः कण्डूः त्रिमदः पाण्डुता मुखे ।।२९।।
श्रवभ्यसेनो वैस्तवं राजगुण्डकुप्रतिहिताः । शालियं शिरसरं च केशानां पतनं स्था ।।३०।।
क्षवथुशितित्वा च मुद्गेमीठिअनिसता । धूमपानाम ग्राम्यगिले बलं भवति चातिकम् ।।३१।।
शिरोरक्षकालानासिन्द्रियाणों स्वरस्य च । न च वातकफाकान्तो बलिनोऽपयुर्धजुवानाः ।।३२।।
धूमसेवकानन्तस्य भ्याप्यः तु न द्व। ।

Heaviness and pain in head, chronic rhinitis, hemicrania, earache, pain in eyes,
cough, hiccup, dyspnoea, spasm in throat, weakness of teeth, discharge due to disor-
ders of ear, nose and eyes, foetid smell from nose and mouth, toothache, anorexia,
spasm in jaw and back neck, itching, worms, pale-face, excessive salivation, disor-
ders of voice, tonsillitis, enlarged uvula, alopecia, grey hairs, hair falling, sneezing,
excessive drowsiness, lack of functioning of intellect, excessive sleep–these disor-
ders are alleviated by smoking. By this, strength of hairs, skull, sense organs and
voice increases. Moreover, the person used to oral smoking does not fall prey to dis-
ease of the parts above jatru (collar bone) having predominance of vāta and kapha,
however strong they are. [27-32]

प्रयोगाने स्त्याही काल: संभविकौतिः ।।३३।।
वातश्लेष्मबाहुलयेतु कालेऽस्यं हि लक्षये । स्नाता मुण्डा मणुपिलिच्छन मुखं दन्तशिचच्च ।।३४।।
नावनासन्निश्चले चातवत् मुण्डो भवेत् । इत्वा वातकफरोगान् च भवन्न्यूर्धजत्रवः ।।३५।।
रोगालस्य तु मेयः धूनपानविषयेऽतः।

Eight times are prescribed for smoking as a daily routine because in these times
the aggravation of vāta and kapha is noticed. A cautious person should smoke after
bath, meals, vomiting, sneezing, tooth brushing, snuffing, use of collyrium and sleep.
Thus diseases of the parts above jatru and predominant in vāta and Kapha do not
arise. Smoking should be done thrice with three puffs each time. [33-35]

परं द्विकालमग्नस्यादः कालेपु बुद्धिमात् ।।३६।।
प्रायणि, तैलिके लेके, वैरेस्यं विक्षतः पिवेत् ।

During the times of day the wise should smoke twice as daily routine, once for
unctuous and three or four times for evacuative effect. [36]

हृदकण्ठेन्द्रियसंशुद्धिर्लघुर्वं शिरसः शम: ।।३७।।
यथेरितानां दोषणां सम्यक्तीतस्य लक्षणम् ।

Well cleaning of heart, throat and sense organs, lightness of head and pacification
of aforesaid dosas–these are the symptoms of proper smoking. [37]

वाधिर्यान्धय्यं मुखे रक्तस्यं शिक्षिभ्रमम् ।।३८।।
अकाले वातितिशेषं मुखः कुर्यादुपयोगः ।

Smoking used in excess and untimely causes complication such as deafness, blind-
ness, dumbness, innate haemorrhage and vertigo. [38]

तत्रेयं विधिः पानं नावयाज्ञतर्पणम् ।।३९।।
