VI]                                    SŪTRASTHĀNA                                         37

Smoking pipe which is straight, having three pouches and nozzle of the
measure of jujube seed, made of material similar to that for enema pipe is recom-
mended. [50]

दूरहिनित्यैः। यन्त्रिकाओ नाडीनत्युकाः ।।५।।
नेदियं वभसे मूमो माताकालचित्ररितः ।

Smoke coming out from distance, intervened by nodes and diluted by pipe chan-
nel and used in proper dose and time does not damage the sense organs. [51]

यदा वोरःक कण्ठञ्ज शिरश्च मुखयो ह्रासे ।
कफश्च मृदुतां प्राप्तः सुपीतं धूमपानमिदम् ।। अधिकञ्च: स्वरो सरः कण्ठश्च सकफो भवेत् ।।५३।।
तिलतैलं सलवः:कश्यमिदं धूमपानिदम् ।। तालु मुखं च कण्ठश्च मुखयो परिशोषणे ।
रुच्ये मुखते नयन रश्च च सरसोऽतिफिक्षणे ।। शिरश्च भ्रमःउत्ताल्या मुखयो कायचोयोजनाते ।।५५।।
इन्द्रियायातलासनं धूमस्तापत्र विनिषेधे ।

Smoking is said as well-used when chest, throat and head attain lightness and
kapha is diluted.

The same is said as ill-used if voice is not clear, throat is full of kapha and head
is cold heavy.

In case of excessive smoking, palate, head and throat dry up with heat sensation,
the person gets thirsty and fainted, bleeding is increased, there is excessive giddiness
and fainting and dysfunctioning of sense organs. [52-55]

सर्वे कर्षिऽसुतेलं च विन्दु च धारे ।।५७।।
प्रादुर्धारदसरतेय गलपोते । यन्यकञ्च यधाकाले चो यथाकाले निषेवते ।।५७।।
न तस्य बद्धो प्राणो न श्रीणुपमाते । न केशाः: केशाः: श्वेता न कनिकाः; श्वेता न पुः ।। धन्यको न पुः ।।५८।।
न च केशाः; मृगुलते वर्णिते च विशेषेः: । मन्यालामः; शिरः:मुलामिदो द्युतिमान्यः ।।५९।।
परिपातीचनित्यात् च शिरः:अकार्यमात्र ।; शिरः: शिरः:काथलात्त नैसाः; यन्पुश्यकरः ।।१६०।।
विभावसोऽतिलाभस्य मलध्या:समाधि: स्वरः; गृष्ठ गरसोभिरो स्वरः: स्थिरम महम् ।।१६१।।
सर्वेन्द्रियाणां दोषत्व सर्वं यन्त्रिं विकासिके; ।
ऊर्ध्वेजागारसमहड्ढु जात र तस्य बोभये ।

Every year one should use anutaila (through snuff) thrice a day in early rains,
autumn and spring when the sky is free from clouds.

One who practises snuffing as prescribed and in time, his vision, smell and
hearing are not affected, his hairs, or beard and mustache do not become white or
grey, hairs do not fall rather they grow abundantly. Stiffness in side neck, headache,
facial paralysis, lockjaw, chronic rhinitis, migraine and head tremors are alleviated.
Veins, joints, ligaments and tendons of skull attain greater strength on saturation
through snuffing. Face becomes cheerful and well-developed, voice melodius,
stable and grave. Freedom from defects and increased strength are bestowed upon
all sense-organs. He is not attacked suddenly by disorders of parts above jatru and
