42                          CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                          [CH.

mouth gargles and their effects, properties of oil and head oil, properties of ear oiling,
oil massage, massage of feet, rubbing over the body, bathing, clean clothes, fra-
grance, wearing of gems, cleaning, hair cutting, use of footwear, umbrella and stick—
all these have been described in this chapter entitled quantity of food etc. [105-111]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने मात्राशितीयो नाम
पञ्चमोऽध्यायः समाप्त: ।।५।।

Thus ends the fifth chapter on quantity of food etc. in Ślokasthāna in
the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. (5)

•

षष्ठोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER VI

अथातस्तस्याशितियमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ।।१।।

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on 'one's diet' etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।१।।

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

सर्वाशिताद्याहाराद्रृक्षणं बलवर्णं वर्धते वर्धते । सर्वद्वितसर्वं विविधं वेष्टाहारव्याप्तयाभ्याम् ।।३।।

One's diet (of various types) leads to promotion of strength and complexion
only if he knows the wholesome according to (different) seasons dependent on
behaviour and diet. [3]

इह खलु संवत्सरं षडङ्गनुविभागेन विभाज्य । तत्राविर्भाव्योदायमयानपादान् च औणपूतिशिरादिनि शीभान्तान्
व्याख्यास्ये, यर्षादिनि दक्षिणायनानि विसर्गं विभजेत् ।।४।।

Here, the year has got six parts according to division into seasons. Amongst
them the (period of) three seasons—from śiśira to grīṣma—is known as ādāna (receiving)
(when the sun takes northward course); (the period of other three seasons) from varṣa
to hemanta is visarga (releasing) with the sun following its southern course. [4]

विसर्गे दुर्वहीयो गतिर्निलः; स्रवणे, तुरे पुनरदात; योगाख्यवृद्धगतस: षिशिरादिभिश्चरितानिपुरावयतसस्तेह-
गतस्, अतो विसर्गः ! स्रोत: ! अदान पुनरग्न्येयः; सोमः: ! अदान सामय (अग्न्यधिककत्वात्)
बलनिर्धितस्नेहस्नेहलितव्यापृते:; समुपदित्यते ।।५।।

In the period of visarga winds are not very rough as in ādāna; soma (moon)
having unobstructed strength replenishes the world continuously with its cold
rays, thus visarga is saumya (having predominance of soma). On the other hand,
ādāna is agneya (predominant in agni). Thus the sun, the wind
