not get proper fuel (diet), it absorbs the bodily rasa that is why the cold vāyu is
vitiated during the cold season. So during hemanta, one should use the unctuous,
sour and salted juice of the meat of dominantly fatty aquatic and marshy animals and
also meat of burrow-dwelling and prasaha (who eat by snatching) types of animals.
After this the person should drink wine, vinegar and honey. One does not lose life-
span if he takes regularly milk products, cane sugar products, fats, oil, new rice and
hot water during hemanta. One should use massage, anointing, head oil, heated
chamber, sun, heated rooms above and underground. During cold season, one should
use carriages, beds and seats well-covered and spread over with heavy sheets made
of wool, silk, skin, hair-braids and variegated blankets. The clothes should be heavy
and warm and he should apply thick paste of aguru on his body. While on bed, he
should sleep, embracing well-developed women having big and prominent breasts
and anointed the body with aguru paste, with exhilaration and libido and enjoy sexual
intercourse upto full satisfaction at the advent of śiśira. When winter begins, one
should avoid vāta-increasing and light food and drinks, restricted diet, strong winds
and intake of cold drinks. [9-18]

हेमन्तशिशिरौ तुल्यं शिशिरेऽदोषशं भृशम् ।  रौक्ष्यादादानगुणं शीतं मेघमारुतवर्षजम् ॥ १९ ॥
तस्मादेमान्तिकः सर्वः शिशिरे विधिरुच्यते । निवातानुष्णो बासिके शिशिरे गृहमाश्रयेत् ॥ २० ॥
कट्वितिक्तकषायाणि पतलानि च शिशिरे त वर्जयेत्पवनोत्पादनि शिशिरे च ॥ २१ ॥

Hemanta and śiśira are similar with the slight difference that the latter has more
roughness due to (beginning of) ādāna and cold due to clouds, winds and rains. Hence
the entire routine of living prescribed for hemanta is applicable to śiśira as well. Dur-
ing śiśira, one should reside in a house which is more wind-free and heated. During
śiśira, one should avoid pungent, bitter, astringent, light, cold and vāta-increasing
food and drinks. [19-21]

वसन्ते निविशेः श्लेष्मा दिनकृद्अभिदीरितः ।  कफाधि वाधते रोगांस्ततः प्रकृतिसद् बहून् ॥ २२ ॥
तस्मादेव कफोचित्ते वमनादीन् कारयेत् । गुर्व्यम्लस्निग्धमधुरं वर्जयेत् दिवास्वप्नम् च वर्जयेत् ॥ २३ ॥
व्यायामोऽभ्यङ्गो धूमं सेवेतापाञ्जनम् ।  सुगन्धानां शरीरेषिं शीतलैर्व जलैर्नरः ॥ २४ ॥
चन्दनागुरुलिप्ताङ्गो यवगोधूमभोजनः ।  तारभं शाशमैणस्य पार्वं लावकपिञ्जलान् ॥ २५ ॥
भक्षयेदिति शेधी धिम्यन्धिकमेनये ।  वस्ने॰ऽनुरूपेण खीणां कानननां च चौरन्तम् ॥ २६ ॥

During spring, the accumulated kapha irritated by the strong rays of the sun
disturbs the body-heat and thus causes many diseases. Hence, during spring, evacu-
ative measures like vomiting etc. should be applied and heavy, sour, fatty and
sweet diet as well as day-sleep should be avoided. One should use regularly during
blossoming of flowers (spring) physical excercise, anointing, smoking, gargles,
collyrium and bath etc. with warm water. He should use paste of sandal and aguru
