VIII	SŪTRASTHĀNA	49

हिका धासोऽडधिः कम्पो विबन्धो हृदयोरसि: । उदहरनिहासाव विकावासृल्यचयीषत् ।।१८।।

By suppression of eructation, the symptoms caused are–hiccup, dyspnoea, anorexia, tremors, obstruction in cardiac region and chest which are prone to treatment similar to that for hiccup. [18]

विनमाजोपसंकोचाः सुचि: कम्पः प्रवेपनं । तृष्भ्यां विबद्धांश सर्व वातजन्मौषधेव ।।१९।।

Suppression of yawning causes bending, convulsion, contraction, numbness, tremors, shaking (of the body) for which the treatment for alleviating vāta is prescribed. [19]

कार्यदौर्बल्यवैवर्ण्यवैमुखदौर्ग्याधिशम्भ्रमः । क्षुद्वेगनिहासाव निर्ग्यमोस लघु भोजनम् ।।२०।।

By suppression of the urge of hunger, emaciation, weakness, disorder of complexion, body-ache, anorexia and giddiness are caused for which fatty, warm and light diet should be prescribed. [20]

कण्ठास्यशोषी बधिरं श्रमः सादो हृदि शूला । पियासानिहासाव शीतं तर्पणमिष्यते ।।२१।।

Suppression of thirst gives rise to dryness of throat and mouth, deafness, fatigue, depression, cardiac pain for which cold and saturating drinks are recommended. [21]

प्रतिश्यायोऽडिरोगश्च हृद्रोगनाशिर्ग्यशम्भ्रमः । वामनिश्चुग्वाव स्वप्नो मदु विधः कथाः ।।२२।।

The symptoms caused by suppression of tears are coryza, eye diseases, heart diseases, anorexia, giddiness for which sleep, wines and pleasing talks are prescribed. [22]

तृष्णाश्रमस्रवश्च व शिरोरोगोऽडिदौर्बल्यम् । निद्रानिहारणाद स्वप्नः संसाहनाशि व ।।२३।।

By suppression of sleep, yawning, body-ache, drowsiness, head disorders and heaviness in eyes are caused for which sleep and gently pressing the body are recommended. [23]

गुल्मदौर्गन्धोभयाः श्रमोचि: वातघारणात् । वायवी तत विरेचनो वातस्वन्ध हिका विधाः ।।२४।।

Suppression of breathing due to exercise causes gaseous tumour, heart diseases and fainting. Rest and the measures for alleviating vāta are prescribed to overcome this condition. [24]

वेगनिबद्धाः रोगा य एते परिकीर्तिताः । इच्छंस्तेषामनुत्पत्ति वेगानेतान् धारयेत् ।।२५।।

The disorders caused by suppression of urges are described here. Persons desiring their prevention should not hold up these urges. [25]

इमान्तु धारयेद्वेगान् मिताथी हिव च । सद्असमानमनस्थानां मनोवाक्कर्मसंभवान् ।।२६।।

One desirous of well-being here and hereafter should hold up the urges of evil ventures relating to thought, speech and action. [26]

लोभशोककृधोऽभिध्यानवेगान् विधारयेत् । मैलैंस्येयोपितिरागाणामभिभवाबद्ध बुद्धिमान् ।।२७।।

12 C.S.-I
