50                                    CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                                    [CH.

The urges of greed, grief, fear, anger, vanity and also of shamelessness, envy, excessive attachment and desire of taking another's property should be held up by the wise. [27]

परस्यादाभिमाशस्य सुखकरत्वानुतास्व च । वाच्यमवाच्यकालाप्तुक्तम् धारयेद्धेगमुचितम् ॥२८॥

One should check the impending urge of speech which is harsh, betraying, lie and untimely used. [28]

देहप्रवृत्तिं काचिद्द्धिते परचिण्हि । क्षोभोग्रासंधिसाहस तस्य वेगविधारयेत् ॥२९॥

Whatever bodily action causes pain to others like adultery, theft and violence should be checked in its impending urge. [29]

पुण्यकयो विषयाष्टनजनसेवकोगम् । पार्थिवकाशन पुण्यः सुखी सुखी भुनीते व ॥३०॥

A virtuous-named person, because of having thought, speech and action free from vices, is really happy and enjoys and earns virtue, wealth and desire. [30]

शरीरचेष्टा या चेष्टा स्वैर्यर्थी बलधनर्थनी । देहव्यायामसंयोगात् भावेव मां समभवेत् ॥३१॥

The bodily movement which is meant for producing firmness and strength is known as physical exercise: one should practise it in moderation. [31]

लाधवं कर्मसार्थ्यं च दृग्लाघ्यपूया । दोषक्षयोग्निवृद्धिश्च व्यायामाद्युपजायते ॥३२॥

By physical exercise one gets lightness, capacity to work, firmness, tolerance of difficulties, diminuation of impurity and stimulation of agni (digestion and metabolism). [32]

श्रमः क्लमः क्षयस्तृष्णा रक्तपित्तं प्रतापनः । अतिव्यायामतः कासो ज्वरश्च वमथुस्तथा ॥३३॥

Excessive physical exercise gives rise to fatigue, exhaustion, emaciation, thirst, internal haemorrhage, darkness before eyes, cough, fever and vomiting. [33]

(Appearance of perspiration, increased respiration, lightness of the organs, feeling of obstruction in cardiac region etc. are the signs of proper physical exercise). (1)

अव्यायामभाष्यध्यायसत्यमर्मजागरण् । नोचिताशंभ सेवेत सुदिप्तागनेतिगाहक ॥३४॥

The wise should not indulge excessively in physical exercise, laughter, speech, travelling on foot, sexual intercourse and night-vigil even if he is accustomed to them. [34]

एतानेचाधिकास्त्यान्यां चेऽतिमात्रां निषेवते । गजं सिंह इवाकर्षन् सहसा स विनश्यति ॥३५॥

One who indulges excessively in these or similar other activities perishes suddenly like a lion dragging an elephant. [35]

(अतिव्यवायभाष्यकर्षणभारिकारिकः । कान्य ये वापि भावनाः ॥१॥

बालवृद्धपचास्थांश्च ये चापि व्यवायार्थं भूमयः । ते सर्वे व्यवायार्थियाम् ॥२॥)

(The persons who are much emaciated due to excessive sexual indulgence, weight-carrying, travelling on foot and evacuative measures and are victims of anger,
