52                          CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                          [CH.

After ascertaining the disorders with the help of signs and symptoms of doṣas,
one should treat them, if they are curable, by prescribing therapies contradictory to
the etiological factors paying due consideration to doṣa and time. [44]

विषयसेवायवृत्तानतो रोगाःप्रादेश्र: । आयक्तेऽनुहितसत्त्माः स्वस्थवृत्तपरो भवेत् ।।४४।।

These diseases and other ones arise in persons who do not follow the routine
prescribed for health; hence the one who wants to be disease-free should follow the
course for the healthy. [45]

माघप्रवृत्ते मासि नवस्यप्रथमे पुनः । सहस्रपानम् यैः हारलेरोपसंयम् ।।४५।।
निगर्विलधशरीरागोपमुष्य विशाद्य सः । बलितश्च सः कुधोज्जस्तरक्षणं न कुधीपतम् ।।४६।।
बलशाभं बलयोभवत कार्यप्रयोजनम् छ । रसायनानि विद्धाति नित्ययोगेधयोग कालनित् ।।४७।।
रोगाभसं धातुप्रसाद्य प्रकुत्य धातुः । ध्यातप्रागम्मप्रकुत्यामूध जरा माप्पूर्वम् ।।४८।।
विशिष्ट विकारणागनुपूर्वि विदितिः । निजनातावर्यात्रिर्वं तु धृगयोदोत्पतः ।।४९।।

One should get the accumulation of doṣas evacuated in the first month of spring,
rainy season and winter. The wise should administer emetics, purgatives, enema and
snuff to those who have got their body oleated and fomented. Thereafter, one who
knows times should administer tried rasāyanas and aphrodisiac formulations in order
and according to suitability. Thus, dhātus having been stabilised in normal condition,
diseases do not arise, dhātus are promoted and aging process is slowed down. This
method for prevention of innate disorders is described here, that for others would be
described separately. [46-50]

ये भूताभियाचाविविधनिशादिसंसः । पूणामानसतो रोगाः प्राज्ञा तेषप्रागन्ति ।।५०।।
ईर्षारतिमदलोभनिमादयः वे । मनोविकारारदेशप्रमुखाः सर्वं प्रापप्रयाणाम् ।।५१।।

In the exogenous diseases which are caused in men by organism, poison, wind,
fire, etc. there is error of intellect. Psychological disorders like envy, grief, fear,
anger, vanity, aversion etc. are also said to be caused by intellectual error. [51-52]

प्रज्ञाः प्रज्ञापरायमाविनिदियोशासः स्मृतिः । देशकालात्मविज्ञानमाधुर्यमसदुपचार्यम् ।।५२।।
आचारानुपतनेन मार्गि की कुधिविधि विज्ञयाऽऽम् । स च हितं कुर्यादात्मनः प्राज्ञो यत् कुर्यादिहित्तयाह ।।५३।।

Forsaking the intellectual errors, calmness of sense organs, memory, sound knowl-
edge of place, time and self and following the code of good conduct-this is the way
shown for prevention of exogenous diseases. The wise should do quite early what he
thinks wholesome for himself. [53-54]

आयोपदेशप्राप्त ग्रहितिरि कारण्यात् । विकारणानुमलूलत्वापनयानां च शानये ।।५४।।

Good knowledge of the instructions of the authorities and their implementation
is the cause (means) for prevention and alleviation of diseases. [55]

पापप्रशचनः सत्त्वाः कण्डशिया । मर्मोधानिनि लुभाः परग्रहोत्था ।।५५।।
परायत्तदत्यलणपा रिपुसिबेः । निर्गुणासपाकयर्षोभिः परिवर्जं नरपाः ।।५६।।
