54                          CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                          [CH.

अष्टमोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER VIII

अशात इन्द्रियोक्तमणींयमशयां व्याख्यास्यायः ।।१।।
Now (I) shall expound the chapter on introductory description of sense-organs. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।२।।
As propounded by Lord Atreya. [2]

इह खलु पञ्चेन्द्रियाणि, पञ्चेन्द्रियद्रव्याणि, पञ्चेन्द्रियाधिष्ठानानि, पञ्चेन्द्रियार्थाः; पञ्चेन्द्रियबुद्धयो भवन्ति, इत्युक्तमिन्द्रियप्रकरेरे ।।३।।
Here are five sense organs, five matters of sense organs, five locations of sense organs, five sense objects and five sense perceptions, thus said in the context of sense organs. [3]

अतीन्द्रिय पुनर्मन: सत्संज्ञकं, 'चेतः' इत्याहुरेके, तदसौसंपदायदायमेमे चेष्टास्रवस्वभूतिनिद्रायणात् ।।४।।
Mind transcends the sense organs, it is known as sattva while some call it as cetas. Its action is dependent on its objects and accomplishment of self and at the same time, it is responsible for the action of sense organs. [4]

स्यादितिद्वाभ्यांग्रहणभिरामराजनैकनैकेनिम्, पुत्रे सत्त, रजसत:सत्मगुणागोत्ताः; न चानेकानि, नहोहे क्षेषकालमनेकेशु प्रवर्तते; तस्मादेककाला सर्वेन्द्रियप्रवर्तिः ।।५।।
Apparently, mind, in person, seems to be more than one because of variations in its own objects, sense objects and its analytical activity and also due to conjunction with the qualities of rajas, tamas and sattwa; but, in fact, there is no numerousness. One (mind) does not attend to more than one at a time that is why there is no activity of all the sense organs simultaneously. [5]

यद्गुणं यापीयोऽपि पुरुषनुर्मते सत्व तत्सत्यपेशिर्वेशिनं मुनयो बाहुन्दगुरुशयात् ।।६।।
The quality which is predominantly and time and again present in mind of a person is the basis on which sages have described the mind according to predominance. [6]

मन: पुर:सराणीन्द्रियाणयेशिग्राणसंयोगिनि भवति ।।७।।
The sense organs are capable of perceiving their objects only when they are supported by mind. [7]

तत् वडुः श्रौत्रं ग्राणं रसनं स्पर्शिनमिति पञ्चेन्द्रियाणि ।।८।।
Visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory and tactile are the five sense organs. [8]

पञ्चेन्द्रियद्रव्याणि—छंवायुतेजोऽपां भूरिति ।।९।।
Five matters of sense organs are–Ākāśa, Vāyu, Tejas, Ap and Pṛthivī. [9]
