VIII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               59

untimely and in crowded surroundings, without making offering first to fire, without
sprinkling with water, without purifying with mantras, with contempt, dirty meal
served by the opponents. One should not take stale things except meat, salad, dry
vegetable, fruits and hard eatables. One should eat wholly except in cases of curd,
honey, salt, roasted grain flower and ghee. One should not take curd in night. One
should not take roasted grain flour singly, in night, after meals, excessively, twice,
interrupted with water intake and tearing with teeth. [20]

नंत्रुः क्षामाशय शयीत, न बेगानीऽन्यकार्यः स्वदत्, न वाय्वादिसलिलसोमार्कांद्विजगुरुप्रतिमुखं विष्ठीविका
(बाय) वच्चोमूत्रप्रदृष्टसेत्, न मच्चानपथवृत्यपेच जनवाति नाजकीले, न जभोमाध्यवयनलिमझलकीभ्याद् स्रोत्य-
शिझापकं मुखेत् ।।२१।।

One should not sneeze, eat and sleep in curved position, one should not be en-
gaged in other works while under the natural urges; one should not excrete sputum
(wind), faeces and urine in front of wind, fire, water, the moon, the sun, brāhmaṇas
and preceptors nor should one urinate on road, in crowded place and while taking
food. One should not let out mucous nasal excreta at the time of recital of mantras,
oblation, studies, religious and auspicious acts. [21]

न विश्वयवत्यनीति, नातिविश्वमपेय, न गुह्यमृद्राज्यपेय, नाधिकारिता, न रजस्वला नाशुरु नामेध्या नासला
नादिश्रयाधाराचरों नावाश्या नागक्षा नान्यकामां मान्यबीमे मान्यति याचीते न चैत्यवलरयथयोभवरनाभवात्-
नवलिलघिचदिशोगतुनुरत्येषु न तस्यायोलिशिषु मशुहैर्नामध्येषु नाराणीत माप्याणाद्युदकमसलमालीतिशे
न विषमाषे न मृत्रोत्सार्गपीडितो न श्रमभायाधायोसार्गलमालीतीते नारूष्ट व्ध्यार्थं गच्छेत् ।।२१।।

One should not insult women nor should one have too much faith on them; one
should not disclose secrets to them nor should one endow her with authority. One
should not perform sexual intercourse with a women having menses or some disease,
impure, inauspicious, with undesirable appearance, behaviour and attendance; un-
skilled, not favourable, having no lust or lust for another person, other's woman, in
female organ of others than human being, in absence of female organ, (by artificial
means), in sacred place, raised platform, cross roads, gardens, cremation ground, ex-
ecution place, water-reservoir, medicine store and in houses of brāhmaṇas, preceptors
and gods (temples), in dawn and dusk, on prohibited days, while unclean, having not
taken (aphrodisiac) medicine, without fixed determination, without having intense
erection (of male organ), without food or having taken food excessively, in uneven
place, pressed with the urges of urine and faeces, suffering from fatigue, physical
exercise, fasting and exhaustion and in place having no privacy. [22]

न सतो न गुह्यं परिवेदेत, नायुष्चिरशिभाचरकर्मत्त्वपुण्यजुत्ताम्यपनयभिनिर्वतेत् ।।२३।।
