VIII]	SŪTRASTHĀNA	61

न कार्यकालमतिपातयेत्, नाप्रीक्षितमभिनिविशेत्, तेन्द्रियपरम्परः स्यात्, न चञ्चलं मनोऽनुधावयेत्, न
क्रोधीन्द्रियाणामतिभारमादध्यात्, न चातिदीर्घसूची स्यात्, न क्रोधहर्षविनुद्विग्नथा, न शोकानुवृत्तसेत्, न निःसाह्लादलोके
पच्छेदाभिदो दैन्यं, बृत्तिमभीक्षणं स्मरेत्, हेतुप्रभावनिष्ठः स्यात्तत्त्वारम्भनिष्ठः, न कृत्यानुशासेत्, न सौीं
जड्डात्, नाप्याहारमनुस्मरेत् ।।२७।।

One should not postpone things at the time of action nor should one take up
anything without examining it; one should not be submissive to his sense organs nor
should one turn his unstable mind round; one should not over burden the sense or-
gans, one should not be too much dilatory; one should not act under the emotions of
anger or exhilaration. One should not live under continued grief. One should not feel
exhilarated in success and depressed in failure; one should always keep his constitu-
tion in mind. One should be confident of the effect of a cause and as such should
always initiate the cause, one should not assume that now nothing is to be done, one
should not give up courage nor should one remember his scandals. [27]

नाग्निर्नतामजमक्षतिलकुशसर्षपैरभिहुयुज्यात्मश्लामायीरिगीरागसामः; अभिमं गपणक्षेत्रीद्धाव्यैर्णं गाणतायुताद्
विधिमृत् यशलायतानो इन्दो मे वीर शिथा मां श्रतिश्रन्तम् आपो हि छेलयः; सुरोशे, दिः; परिस्पृष्टोऽथी यादो चाभूमुष्य
मुष्यि खादि षोधसुपर्विदेशरागमां इदय शिरक ।।२८।।

One expecting blessings for him should not offer oblation to fire with cow ghee,
barley, sesamum, sacred grass and mustard while unclean, one should touch water
reciting the mantras 'Agnirme nāpagacchet' etc. After touching the lips and feet,
one should touch with water all the orifices in head, and location of self, heart and
head. [28]

ब्रह्मचर्यज्ञानदानमैत्रीकारुण्यप्रशमपरक्ष स्याभित ।।२९।।

One should be devoted to celibacy, knowledge, charity, friendship, compassion
cheerfulness, indifference and calmness. [19]

तत श्लोकाः—

पञ्चषट्कमुदितं मनो हेतुगुतुरूपम् । इन्द्रियोपकमेऽध्याये स्वनुप्रष्टमखिलेनेव ष ।।३०।।
स्वस्थवृत्तं यथोदितं पः; सयागनुतिखाति स स मगः; शतगयोपाचारणुष न विद्युतसे ।।३१।।
नूलोकमागुरयं यशास सादुनीसः; । यभिचारिणि भूतानां मन्यतागुरुशङ्गसे ।।३२।।
परात् युक्तिनो लोकात् पुण्यकर्मा जयति । तस्मादनुतमयुद्धरेचित सर्वेण सर्वदा ।।३३।।

Now the summing up verses–

The five pentads, mind, four causes and the code of good conduct have been
described fully in the chapter on introductory description of sense organs. One
who follows the code of conduct for the healthy, lives a life of hundred years without
any abnormality. Such person, praised by the noble ones, fills up the human world
