IX]                              SŪTRASTHĀNA                                63

बहुता तत्र योगरतत्मनेकविधकल्पना । संयक्षेति चतुष्कोऽस्मे रत्थाणां गुण उच्यते ।।७।।

Abundance, effectivity, various pharmaceutical forms and excellence of com-
position–these are the four qualities of drugs. [7]

उपचारज्ञता दाक्ष्यनुराग्ड भत्तिर् । णीयो चेति चतुष्कोऽयं गुण: परिचरे जने ।।८।।

Knowledge of nursing, dexterity, loyalty and cleanliness–these are four qualities
of an attendant. [8]

स्मृतिर्निर्देशकारित्वमभीक्लमवाणि च । ज्ञत्रकाले च रोगणामातुरस्य गुण: स्मृता: ।।९।।

Memory, obedience, fearlessness and providing all information about the disor-
der–these are the qualities of a patient. [9]

कत्रो षोडशगुणे सिद्धौ पादचतुष्टयम् । विज्ञाता शासिता भोक्ता प्रधानो भिषगत्र तु ।।१०।।

This quadruped consisting of sixteen qualities is the cause of success but here
also the physician is the main because of his having specific knowledge, administra-
tive and managing positions. [10]

यथा हि कारणे पक्वर्यंचा पात्रनर्मानलाः । विजेतृभूमिजे भूमिक्षुः प्रहरणानि च ।।११।।
अनुग्राहकाणा सिद्धौ सादाः कारणसंज्ञिता: । वैद्यस्तात्विभिलेष्वस्यर्षो प्रधानं कारणं भिषक् ।।१२।।

As in the act of cooking, utensils, fuel and fire and in victory of the victorious
land, army and weapons are causative factors, similarly, in the success of a physician
in treatment (of disorders) patients etc. are mentioned as causative factors. Thus the
physician is the principal cause. [11-12]

मृण्डकचक्रसूत्राः: कुम्भकारादृते वचा । नावढन्ति गुणं बीचादृते पादत्रयं वचा ।।१३।।

As earth, stick, wheel, thread etc. do not serve the purpose (of making a pitcher)
without the potter, the other three legs are in the same position without the
physician. [13]

गन्धर्वपुरवत्साणो गतिभाणाः: सुदुरूयाः । याति त्वक्षेत्रे युद्धिमच्छुपाचडतीक्षण: ।।१४।।
सति पादत्रये ज्ञाती भिषजालज्ञ कारणम् ।

That extremely severe disorders vanish like the (imaginary) city of gandharvas
and even simplest disorders aggravate in want of quick management in spite of the
three other legs being existent, confirms that the learned and the ignorant physicians
are responsible for the above two consequences respectively. [14]

वरमात्मा छोऽज्ञेन विकिलेसा कुणीता ।।१५।।
पाणिनाधाराबाध्वबूरत्वानादितीभीतेन । नौर्पलनवदिज्ञाशो भिषक् वरति कर्मसु ।।१६।।

It is better to self-immolate than to be treated by an ignorant (physician). As a
blind man moves about with the help of the movement of his hands and as a boat
under storm, the ignorant physician, due to ignorance, proceeds in the therapeutic
management with too much fear (and lack of confidence). [15-16]
