64                              CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                              [CH

यदृच्छया समापप्रमुदार्ये निषतायुषम् । भिषजानीं विहन्यात् शतान्यनियताञ्युषाम् ।।१७।।
Such one regarding himself as physician, cures by chance a diseased person whose life-span is certain but, on the other hand, kills hundreds having uncertain life-span. [17]

तस्माच्चतुर्षोऽधिज्ञाने प्रवृत्तौ कार्यदर्शने । भिषक् चतुर्विध युक्तः प्राणाभिसर उच्यते ।।१८।।
Hence, a physician devoted to these four–scriptures, understanding, application and practical experience is known as one who promotes life. [18]

हेतौ निरो प्रशमने रोगाणामुपचर्यते । जानन् चतुर्विधं वस्तु स राजाहो भिषकुतमः ।।१९।।
The physician who possesses knowledge of the four aspects–cause, symptoms, cure and prevention of diseases, is the best one and is fit for a king. [19]

शस्त्रं शास्त्रमिर जलिले गुणदोषोपयायुवत् । पाणिमेजोऽतिशुद्धस्तु प्रज्ञा चिकित्साय विशोधयेत् ।।२०।।
Weapon, scripture and water depend on their recepient for consequent merits and demerits. So, (a physician) should purify his intellect for treatment (of patients). [20]

विद्या चिताईं विज्ञानं स्मृतिलतत्परता क्रिया । तत्त्वे भक्तिः काशितिन्भ्याः सिद्धिर्मानः । वैश्रसाभिभिमानभावलेकविवेकाभ्याम् ।।२१।।
यच्च लोके गुणाः सर्वे सन्नि विद्यादयः शुभाः । स वैद्यशब्द सद्भभूगेर्हृदि प्राणिनुकद्भवत् ।।२३।।
Learning reasoning, specific knowledge, memory, devotion and action–one who possesses these six qualities, nothing remains unachievable for him.

Learning, wisdom, practical knowledge, experience, accomplishment and popularity–out of these even one quality is sufficient to give significance to the degree of 'Vaidya'. The one who possesses all the auspicious qualities like learning etc. deserves to hold the honourable degree of 'Vaidya' who showers happiness on the living beings. [21-23]

शास्त्रं च चक्षुः प्रकाशार्थं दर्शनं सुदिव्यारम् । तस्माभ्यां भिषक् सुमुतास्यां चिकित्साप्रकाराशास्ताम् ।।२४।।
चिकित्साये त्रयः पादाः भिषग्यायानशीलयन् । तस्माद् प्रशस्तगुणोपेयान् भिषजस्याशोधनस्तायत् ।।२५।।
Scriptures are like light for the eye, endowed properly with both these factors, the physician while treating (a patient) does not commit mistakes. Because in treatment, the (other) three legs are dependent on the physician, hence the physician should make all efforts to enrich his qualities. [24-25]

मैत्री कारुण्यमार्तेषु शाक्ये प्रीतिसमेक्षणम् । प्रकृतिस्थेषु भूतेषु वैद्यवृत्तिश्चतुर्विधा ।।२६।। इति ।
Friendliness and compassion towards the diseased, interest in the amenable and indifference to those who are moving towards end–this is the fourfold attitude of physician. [26]
