68                              CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                              [CH

origin of disorder is recent, absence of complications, involvement of one doṣa in
pathogenesis, body capable of tolerating all therapeutic measures and proper arrange-
ment of four legs (physician, drug, attendant and patient). This denotes the curable
disease. [11-13]

निमित्तपूर्विकाणां सप्तानां मध्यमे बले । कालकृतुदिष्यायां सामान्येन्यतमस्य च ।।१४।।
गर्भिणीवृद्धबालानां नातुपद्रवपीडितम् । शस्त्रक्षाराग्निकृतानामग्न्यं कृच्छदेशजम् ।।१५।।
विचाद्येकपरे रोगे नातिपूर्णचतुष्पदम् । द्विजं नातिकालं वा कृच्छ्रोयाधिं हिदोषजम् ।।१६।।

In case of medium severity of cause, prodoomes and symptoms similarity of any
one of time, constitution and dūṣya, the patient being a pregnant lady, old man and a
child, not afflicted with too many complications, having operation of surgical meas-
ures, alkali or fire, not recently developed, location in vital parts, involvement of one
passage but not equipped fully with four legs (of therapy), of two passages but not of
very long period and having causation by two doṣas, the disease should be taken as
hardly curable. [14-16]

शेष्यत्वादपो गाप्यसाध्यं यत्खेदेषाम् । लक्षणाद्यसुखयन्नेव हेतुवो ऽशुभलैक्षणम् ।।१७।।
गम्भीरं बहुधातुस्थं पर्वस्थिसन्धिपीडितम् । नित्यनूनशालिनं चिरं द्वीयेकालव्यधिस्थितम् ।।१८।।

The palliable disease, though incurable, does not cut the life-span and the patient
gets some relief by observing the wholesome routine, but the trouble aggravates shortly
even by the slight cause. Such disease is deep-seated, located in more than one dhātus,
affecting vital parts and joints, ever continuing for a long period and caused by two
doṣas. [17-18]

विघाद्धिदोषजं, तीत्रं प्रत्याख्येयं त्रिदोषजम् । किद्भायवमतिक्रान्तं सर्वमार्गानुसारिणम् ।।१९।।
औत्सुत्यकरतिनियोगकारिविद्रिनूतनत्वाद्यम् । दुर्बलस्य सुदुर्थ व्याधिं साधिचेष्टे च ।।२०।।

Likewise, the rejectable (incurable) disease is caused by three doṣas, not amena-
ble to any therapy, involving all the passages, producing anxiety, uneasiness, and
disorders of consciousness, destroying the (function of) the sense organs, quite ad-
vanced, haing developed fatal signs particularly in weak patients. [19-20]

भिषजा प्राक् परीक्षेयं विकाराणां स्वलक्षणम् । पश्चात्कर्मसमारम्भः कार्यः साध्येषु शीषतः ।।२१।।
साध्यासाध्यविभागोयं यः समयकृतिलक्षितम् । न स मैत्रेयतुल्यानां मिथ्याबुद्धिं निबध्नतिः ।।२२।।

Thus, a wise physician should first examine the specific characters of diseases
and then take up the treatment only in case of curable diseases. One who knows The
difference between curable and incurable diseases and takes action in right earnest is
not liable to produce wrong notions in persons like Maitreya. [21-22]

तत श्लोकाः—
इहोद्यं पाठयुणाः प्रभवो भेषजाभ्यः । आत्रेयपैरेषेमती महिषिविष्यनिद्धयः; ।।२३।।
