XII                                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                              69

चतुर्विंशतिकाध्यायाध्यायः स्थलाऽध्यायः । उक्त महाचतुष्पादे येथापार्थं विचिन्तितम् ।।२४।।

Now the summing up verses–

Therapeutics, qualities of (four) legs (of therapeutics), effect of therapeutics,
views of Atreya and Maitreya, conclusion of two divergent views, four categories of
diseases (according to prognosis) with their respective characters–All this has
been described in the chapter on great quadruple on which the therapeutics
depends. [23-24]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने महाचतुष्पादो नाम दशमोध्यायः ।।१०।।

Thus ends the tenth chapter on great quadruple in Ślokasthāna in the
treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (10).

•

एकादशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XI

अथातिस्तत्रैषणीयमध्यायमाख्यास्याः ।।१।।

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on three desires etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।२।।

As propounded by Lord Atreya. [2]

इह खलु पुरुषेणानृणतालब्धुविद्याबलवीर्यपराक्रमेण हितमिह चामुष्मिंश्च लोके समनुपश्यता तिस्र एषणाः
यथैवाह धर्मिणा । तद्यथा–प्राणैषणा, धनैषणा, परलोकैषणेति ।।३।।

A person, having underaged mind, intellect, potency and prowess and looking
to his well-being here and in the world hereafter, should pursue three desires such as
desire for life, desire for wealth and desire for the other world. [3]

आसां तु खल्वेषणानां प्राणैषणां तावत् पूर्वतमामाहैत । कस्मात् ? प्राणापरिरक्षणे हि सर्वलाभः । तत्स्वास्थ्यात्–
स्वास्थ्यं तदवधूयात्नम्; आतुरस्य विकारशमनेनैवोपमापः; तदुभयमेतदुक्तं यद्यस्तु च; तथाऽनुस्तोतमनुपात्तिमाः;
प्राणानुगृहणतीर्थंपानुग्राहयतीति प्रयत्नेनायुर्विस्तारता भवति ।।४।।

Out of all these desires, one should follow the desire to live first. Why ? because
on departure of life, everything departs. That can be maintained by observance of the
code of conduct for the healthy and non-carelessness in alleviation of disorders in the
diseased. Both these have been said (in part) and will be said further. Following the
aforesaid path, by maintaining the vital power, one achieves long life. Thus desire for
life is described. [4]
