72                                    CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                                    [CH

द्विविधमेव खलु सर्वं समासतः; तस्य चतुर्विधा परीक्षा–आयोपदेशः; प्रत्यक्षम्, अनुमानं, युक्तिश्चेति ।।१७।।

All can be divided into two–existent (manifest) and non-existent (unmanifest). Their examination is fourfold–authoritative statement, perception, inference and rationale. [17]

आप्तास्तनाः–
रजसतमोभ्यां निर्मुक्तास्तपोज्ञानबलेन ये । येषां त्रिकालमपक्लृप्तं तन्नासत्यमुखं वचः ।।१८।।
आप्ताः; तिस्र एव विद्याते येषां शिष्टाश्च बुद्धयते ॥ संशयातिगतं वाक्यं येषां तद्धि सदा भवेत् ।।१९।।

Now the definition of the authority–those who are free from rajas and tamas and endowed with strength of penance and knowledge, and whose knowledge is flawless, always uncontradicted and true universally in past, present and future, are known as āpta (who have acquired all the knowledge), śiṣṭa (expert in the discipline) and vibuddha (enlightened); their word is free from doubt and is true because being devoid of rajas and tamas how they can speak a lie. [18-19]

आत्मेन्द्रियमनोभ्यार्थैः संनिकर्षात् प्रवर्तते । व्यक्ता साद्यतनेवोक्ता प्रत्यक्षं सा विरुद्ध्यते ।।२०।।

The knowledge which arises by the contact of self, sense organs, mind and sense objects, is explicit and only limited to the present is known as perception. [20]

प्रत्यक्षपूर्वं त्रिविधं चतुर्विधमे । चाग्निर्धूमात् मुपैर्धूमात् मुपैर्धूमात् ।।२१।।
एवं भ्यागमनयोश्चिह्नाद् फलमनागतम् । दृष्टया बीजात् फलं जातिविचेत सदृशाद् बुधः ।।२२।।

Inference is based on prior perception. It is of three types and is related to the three times. One can infer fire from smoke, sexual intercourse from observing the foetus and the future fruit from seed. By observing the bearing of similar fruit, the learned infer the causation of seed. [21-22]

जलकर्षणयोस्तिस्तिसंभवः । युक्तिः; पश्चमागेऽणुयोगिभ्यां संभवस्था ।।२३।।
मथ्यमान(क)मथ्यासंयोगाद्धिसंभवः । युक्तिज्ञाता बहुसाधारणद्व्याधिविहीयते ।।२४।।

The growth of crops is observed from combination of water, ploughing, seed and climate and so is the growth of foetus from combination of six dhātus. This is (possible only because of) yukti–(proper and rational combination of all constituent factors). Similar is the case of production of fire from the combination of one to be churned, churning (process) and the churning stick. So is the arrangement of four limbs (of therapeutics) which alleviates diseases if combined and used rationally. [23-24]

युक्तिः; पश्यति या भावान् बहुसाधारणायोजनात् । युक्तिज्ञाता सा त्रेषु सिद्धा त्रिवर्गसाधने ।।२५।।

(Thus yukti may be defined as follows):–
The knowledge which observes the things produced by combination of multiple causative factors is yukti (rationale). It is true in the three times and is also helpful in achieving the three categories (virtue, wealth and enjoyment). [25]
