74                              CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                              [CH

intellectual interest or otherwise in objects, memory of pervious birth showing the
coming back of the persons who had left the world, liking or otherwise in spite of
similar look. [30]

अत एवानुभूयते—यत् स्वकृतमपरिहार्यमविनाशि पौर्वदैहिकं दैवसंज्ञकमात्यन्तिकं कर्म, तस्यैतत् फलम्;
इतश्चान्तदेहिविधिः; फलाद्योनिरनुभूयते, फलं च बीजात् ।।३१।।

On the same basis, it is inferred that the deed of the self is unavoidable,
undestructible, related to previous body and continuing is known as 'daiva' (fate).
This (rebirth) is result of that (deed). Hereafter another (birth) would also be these
seed is inferred from fruit and vice versa. [31]

पुतिर्हि षड्—षड्भूतान्यनुत्पन्नार्थं, कार्यकारणयोगात् क्रिया; कृतस्य कर्मणः फलं वाकृतस्य,
नाङ्करोत्यबीजतोऽङ्करः; कर्मसंश्रयं फलम्, नान्यस्मादन्योऽङ्करोत्यबीजतः; इति युक्तिः ।।३२।।

Thus, also this—foetus is formed by six dhātus, action is
due to conjunction of doer and instrument, result comes out of the action performed
and of not unperformed, there is no growth of sprout without seed. Result is in
consonance with action, no another (plant) grows from another seed. This is ration-
ale. [32]

एवं प्रमाणैर्विधिमिर्विदित पुनर्भवे षड्विद्यैरुपायैः; तत्था—गुरुशुश्रूषायध्ययने तपोपर्यचने दारक्रियायामन्यत्वादाने
भृत्यपरणेऽतिथिभूजनां क्रोधनाभिध्यायां मनसांनिग्रहेण देहेन्द्रियमनसेकाम्पवलयने देदिन्द्रियमनोविषयेभाग्यां
मनःसमाधिनिः; यानि मान्यपूर्वैर्योधेभिभूर्यानि सम्पादयितुं शीलानि स्वर्गाणि युक्तिविभाकारणि विद्यापाराशस्ते
करणु; यानि कुर्वीद यश सत्पते लोक्यं स्वर्गम् ।। इति तृतीया परलोकेयश्च व्याख्यातः ।।३३।।

Thus, re-birth having been established by (all) the four means of correct knowl-
edge, one should attend to religious scriptures (and duties prescribed by them) such
as service of the teacher, study, performance of rites, marriage, reproduction,
supporting servants entertaining guests, charity, refraining from desire of taking
(another's property), penance, refraining from envy, benevolent acts of body, speech
and mind, constant examination of body, sense organs, mind, objects, intellect and
self and also concentration of mind. One should also take up such other works which
are undespised by noble persons, heavenly and which promote livelihood. Acting so
one attains fame here and heaven hereafter. Thus the third desire for the other world
is explained. [33]

अथ खलु त्रय उपस्तम्भाः, त्रिविधं बलं, त्रीण्याययतनानि, त्रयो रोगाः, त्रयो रोगमार्गाः, त्रिविधा चिकित्सा,
त्रिविधौषधियोग्यति ।।३४।।

There are three sub-pillars, three types of strength, three causes, three
diseases, three passages of diseases, three types of physicians and three types of
therapy. [34]
