XII]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                         75

व्रत उपस्तम्भा इति—आहारः, स्वप्नो, ब्रह्मचर्यमिति; एभिभिस्त्रिभिर्युक्तयुक्तस्तुपस्तम्भैः; शरीरं
बलवर्णोपचयोभिवर्धमानमेति यावदायुः संस्कारात् संस्कारमहितानुपसेवमानस्य, च इहैवोपदेक्ष्यते ॥३५॥

There sub-pillars are–diet, sleep and celibacy, if these three are observed
properly and the body is supported well by these pillars, it continues well
endowed with strength, complexion and development till the completion of lifespan
provided one abstains from harmful practices which will be explained here itself. [35]

त्रिविधं बलमिति–सहजं, कालजं, युक्तिकृतं च। सहजं मनःशरीरसत्त्वात्मयोः; प्राकृतं, कालयुक्तजुद्भिज्ञाभ्यां स्वः कृतं
च, युक्तिकृतं पुरस्तादाहारचेष्टायोगजम् ॥३६॥

Strength is of three types–congenital, time-effected and acquired. Congenital
is that which is natural to the body and mind; time-effected is due to seasonal varia-
tions and age factor. Acquired one is produced by proper application of diet and
exercise. [36]

त्रिविधायतनमिति–अर्थानां करणेन; कालस्य चातियोगायोगमिथ्यायोगाः। तत्तातिप्रयोगो दृश्यमानतिभास
दर्शनमित्यादीनां; सर्वशोऽदर्शनमयोगः; अतिशयातिविकृतश्चौरैरेत्रैराविद्धुतेद्धियदीप्तविस्तरानुकिलविसदप्रशान्तवि-
दर्शनं मित्यायोगः, तमःप्रतिसस्वास्थ्यदेहावाण्डैनासह शब्दमानातित्यां मित्यायोगः; तथाऽतितीव्रायांनाधः
प्राणमयोगः, सर्वशोऽप्राणमयोगः, तद्विपरीतद्धिलविषयप्रतिकूलगुणानादिषु मित्यायोगः; तथाऽतितीव्र
रसायांनाधःयोगः, सर्वशोऽरसायनयोगः, मित्यायोगो राजिकादाप्यायतेद्भवानयोगः; वथा
रसानामयांनाधःयोगः, सर्वशोऽरसानुयोगः, मित्यायोगो राजिकस्वाहारचेष्टाविषयभिषग्योगादेष्टव्यः;
तथाऽतितीव्रोपशमनानां मृत्यूनां सनाशमनायुतन्नादीनां चायुर्वेदाचार्यादहितचेष्टानुमूलनादेशाम्
शीतोष्णादिनां च स्पर्शानामनुसेवैव स्थापनेव विश्वपरस्थामिस्तानभिपूर्तिमूर्तिभूरहितप्रदुष्टवर्जिता मित्यायोगः ॥३७॥

There are three causes (of disorders)–excessive, negative and perverted uses
of sense-objects, actions and time. Such as–excessive gazing at the overbrilliant
object is excessive use, avoiding looking altogether is negative use and seeing too
near, too distant, fierce, frightful, wonderful, disliked, disgusting, deformed and
terrifying objects is perverted use of visual objects. Likewise, to hear too much the
loud sound of clouds, drums, cries etc. is excessive use; not at all hearing is negative
use and hearing of harsh and frightful words and those which indicate Death of
dear ones, loss, humiliation etc. is perverted use of auditory objects. Too much
smelling of too sharp, intense and congestant odors is excessive use, not at all
smelling is negative use and smelling of foetid, disliked, impure, decomposed, poi-
soned air, cadaveraceous odour etc. is perverted use of olfactory objects. Likewise,
too much intake of rasas (tastes) is excessive use, not at all taking is negative use of
gustatory objects. Perverted use of those will be described in the chapter dealing with
