XII]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                77

    Time is year which again consists of winter, summer and rainy seasons with
(dominant) characters of cold, heat and rains respectively. If there is excess of the
specific character of time, it is called as excessive occurence, deficiency in these
characters denote the deficient occurence and time having characters opposite to its
own ones indicates the perverted occurence. Time is again known as consequence. [42]

    इन्द्रियार्थसंनिपातयोगः, प्रज्ञापराधः, परिणामश्चेति त्रयिविधिवयिकल्पा हेतवो विकाराणां; समयोगेयुक्तास्तु
प्रकृतिहेतवो भवन्ति ।।४३।।

    Thus, unwholesome conjunction of sense organs and objects, intellectual error
and consequence–these three with three subdivisions each are causes of disorders while
conjoined in balanced combination are causes of normalcy. [43]

    सर्वेभावेषे भावानाँ भावाभावौ तानुरेण योगायोगातियोगानिच्यायोगान् समुपलभ्येते; यथास्वयुत्पत्तिहेणी हि
भावाभावौ ।।४४।।

    Existence and non-existence of all the objects are not met with without proper
and improper (excessive, negative and perverted) uses respectively. Existence and
non-existence depend on the respective uses. [44]

    त्रयो रोगा भूति–निजाबागन्तुमानसाः: । तत्र निजः शारिरीदोषमूलः, आगन्तुभूतविषवाग्विषमसंगपरादिदोषमूलः,
मानसः पुनरिष्टस्य लाभालाभाभयाप्नादिहेत्वोजायते ।।४५।।

    There are three (types of) diseases–innate, exogenous and psychic. Innate is
that which arises due to bodily dosas, exogenous is that which is caused by Bhūta
(spirits and organisms), poisoned air, fire, trauma etc. Psychic is that which is caused
by non-fulfilment of desires and facing of the undesired. [45]

    तत् बुद्धिमता मानसव्याधिपरीतेनापि सता बुद्ध्वा हिताहितमनवेक्ष्यदेव धर्मार्थकामानामहितानामनुपसेवने
हितानाँ चोपसेवने प्रयतितव्यं,न ह्यनरेण लोके त्रयमेतनात्रं किंचिदाम्यते सुखं वा दु:खं वा; तस्मादेतेष्वादुपेते–
तद्धियानो चोपसेवने प्रयतितव्यम्, आत्मदेशकुलकालशक्तिशकानाँ यथावच्छत्ति ।।४६।।

    The wise person, inspite of being affects by mental disorder, should strive
for abstaining from unwholesome virtue, wealth and enjoyment and for pursuing the
wholesome ones, constantly keeping an eye to wholesomeness and otherwise with
clear understanding. No mental happiness or unhappiness can occur in this world
without these three. Hence, this should be practised–effort to remain in touch with
the experts and to know properly the self, place, clan, time, strength and capacity. [46]

भवति चात्र–
    मानसे प्रति भेषजं विवर्गस्यान्ववेक्षणं । तद्विज्ञेया विज्ञानात्पदीनाँ च सर्वशः ।।४७।।

    Here it is said–
