XII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   79

some containers with medicines, models (and charts), useless speech and look use
the title of 'physician' are fools and fake ones. Those who practise in the name of
physicians accomplished in wealth, fame and knowledge, and, though not similar to
them are the physicians imitating the accomplished ones. Those who are accomplished
in rational administration, knowledge, specific knowledge and success, and who pro-
vide happiness and promote life are the real physicians in which qualities of physi-
cians are found. [50-53]

त्रिविधमौषधमिति—दैवव्यपाश्रयं, युक्तिव्यपाश्रयं, सत्त्वावजयश्च । तत्र दैवव्यपाश्रयं—मन्त्रौषधमणिमङ्गलबल्युपहार-
होमनियमप्रायश्चित्तोपवाससंस्कारमणिषाणामङ्गादि, युक्तिव्यपाश्रयं—पुनराहारौषधद्रव्याणां योजना, सत्त्वावजयः—
पुनरहितेभ्योर्थेभ्यो मनोनिग्रहः ॥५४॥

There are three types of therapy–spiritual, rational and psychological. The spir-
itual therapy consists of recitation of mantras, wearing roots and gems, auspicious
acts, offerings, gifts, oblations, following religious precepts, atonement, fasting, in-
voking blessings, falling on (the feet of) the gods; pilgrimage etc. The rational therapy
consists of rational administration of diet and drugs. Psychological therapy is restraint
of mind from the unwholesome objects. [54]

शरीरदोषप्रकोपे खलु शरीरसंशोधनाय त्रयाणिक्रियाविशेषाणिचिकित्सां—अन्तः परिमार्जनं, बहिः—परिमार्जनं, शस्त्रप्रणिधानं
चेति । तत्रान्तःपरिमार्जनं यत्तत्‌-शरीरमभ्यन्तरप्रविश्याहारजलान्यायाधीनि प्रमार्ष्टि, बह्यपमार्जनं-शरीरमभिव्यक्तवैदेह-
परिषेकोन्मर्दनाद्यैरपमार्गं प्रमार्जति इत्युच्चते; शस्त्रप्रणिधानं पुनःछेदनभेदनपाटनाचूषणलेखनस्वेदाप्रच्छानसीवने-
षणाहारणसंलेखनलीकाहितः ॥५५॥

In case of vitiation of bodily dosas, three types of therapy are administered in
relation to the body–they are : internal cleansing, external cleansing and surgical
operation. Internal cleansing means the therapy which, entering into the body inside,
alleviates the disorders caused by diet. The therapy which by external contact through
massage, fomentation, pasting, sprinkling, pressing etc. removes the disorders.
Surgical operation consists of excision, incision, puncturing, rupturing, scraping,
extraction, scarifying, probing and (application of) alki and leeches. [55]

भगवान् वाच—
प्राओ रोगे सुप्रयते बाह्ळोनाम्यन्तरेण वा । कर्मणा लभते शर्म शक्तोपक्रमणेन वा ॥५६॥
बालस्तु खलु मोढात् प्रमाढात् न शुश्रूषते । उपकामां प्रथमं रोगे शुश्रियात्सुहृत् ॥५७॥
अनुगृहे प्रथमं मूलं रोगः पश्चादुपसते । स जानतुपो मृषायाति बलमाप्नोत् वृत्तिः ॥५८॥
न मूढो लभते रोगे तादात्म्यात् पीडते च । पीडितस्तु यदि प्रह्लोत् कुशले क्षायाविनिश्चये ॥५९॥
अथ पुरुषंश् द्वारांश शार्गोद्वातुभ्य भावते । सर्वदेशीयो ते क्षेत्रिद्विगणसत्त्वाद्विहितम् ॥६०॥
तत्रविच च कः शक्तो कुर्वंत् व्याधिमीदितम् । कुरुते क्षीणोदित्वं दीनं परिहर्तुं गताप्नुयत् ॥६१॥
