80                          CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                          [CH

स ज्ञातारमनासाद्य बालस्त्वजिति जीविनम् । गोधा साहूलमेवाक्रुध्यमाणा बलीयसा ।।६२।।
तस्मात् प्रागेव रोगेभ्यो रोगेषु जल्पेषु वा । भेषजैः प्रतिकुर्वीत च इच्छेत् सुखमात्मनः ।।६३।।

Here are the verses—

The wise, in case of disease, gets relief by external or internal or surgical measures, the childish, due to confusion or carelessness do not know about the emerging disorder in early stage as fools about the enemy. The disorder, though having a minute start, advances afterwards and gradually becoming deep-rooted takes away the strength and life of the foolish one. The fool does not realise till he is afflicted and only thereafter he thinks for controlling the disease. Then he collects son, wife and kins and requests them to bring some physician even at the cost of his entire possession, but who can be able to save him, the devoid of life, weak, afflicted, emaciated, anxious and with the sense organs waned away. Thus not finding a saviour that fool leaves his life like an inguana with her tail bound and dragged by a strong person. Hence one, who wishes happiness, should counteract with medicines before the disorder is produced or when it is newly risen. [56-63]

तत्र श्लोकौ—
इच्छाः सम्पूतलम्भा बलं कारणमार्गाः । तिसृभिश्चैव मार्गाभि भिषजो भेषजानि च ।।६४।।
त्रिविधाहो सङ्ख्यिः कृष्णातेयेण भीयाम् । भावान्वत्सलेन येषु सर्वं प्रतिष्ठितम् ।।६५।।

Now the summing up verses—

Desires, sub-pillars, strength, causes, disorders, passages, physicians and therapies these eight things have been described as three-fold by Kṛṣṇātreya, wise and detached from worldly things. On these all is based. [64-65]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने तिस्रैषणीयो नामैकादशोऽध्यायः ।।११।।

Thus ends the eleventh chapter on three desires etc. in Ślokasthāna in the treatise compiled by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (11).

•

द्वादशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XII

अथातो वातकलाकलीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ।।१।।

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on merits and demerits of vāta etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।२।।

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]
