86                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                         [CH

किंयोनयः काति स्नेहाः के च तेऽङ्गणाः प्रभुतः । कालायतनपने के कास्य काति काह विधायराः ॥४॥
कति मात्राः कर्मणाः का व केऽपनीदियते । कश केऽतो हितः स्नेहः प्रकर्षः स्नेहने च कः ॥५॥
स्नेहाः के के च ये निमग्नातिनिमग्नातिनिमयलक्षणाः । किं पानात् प्राक् पश्चे जीर्णे किञ् हिताहितम् ॥१॥
के मृदुकृशकोष्ठाः का व्यापद् निर्दध्वत् काः । अच्छे सयोगेव चैव स्नेहे का युतिस्थितिः ॥७॥
विचारण: केषु योज्या विधिना केन तनु तभ्ये ! । स्नेहस्यभिविदितान सहितः विदेतुत विदेतुम् ॥८॥

What are the sources? How many are the uncting substances? what are the properties of these substances separately and also their time and vehicle? How many and what are the unction media? How many doses and in what measure are prescribed and for whom? what uncting substance is suitable for whom? What are the maximum and minimum durations of unction? Who are fit for unction and who are otherwise? What are the symptoms of uncted, non-uncted and excessively uncted? What is beneficial before, after intake and after digestion of uncting substance? Who are those having soft, medium and hard bowel? What are the complications and their treatment? What is to be done during intake of simple as well as evacuative unction? To whom and by what method the media may be administered? I want to have knowledge about unction. O Lord heaving immeasurable understanding![4-8]

अथ तत्सन्शयोत् तत्वज्ञाय पुनर्वसुः । स्नेहानां द्विविधं सौम्य योनिः स्थावराचरम् ॥९॥

Then, punarvasu, the remover of his doubt, replied-there are two types of the sources of uncting substances-vegetable and animal, O gentle one! [9]

तिलः प्रियालातिलकुशुम्भबिल्वारुकमूलातसीनिकोचाक्षोदकरञ्जनयुगुलसर्षपाः ।
कुशुम्भतिलत्यारुकमूलातसीनिकोचकाक्षोदकरञ्जनयुगुलसर्षपाः ॥१०॥
स्नेहानाम् स्थावरशेणितासव मतुर्गूजा मांसमजनाः कर्षिकाः ।
तेषां दधिक्षीरमृपमेघ मज्जा म तथोचितदिष्यते ॥११॥

Tila, priyāla, abhiṣuka, bibhītaka, dantī, harītakī, craṇḍa, madhūka sarṣapa, kusumbha, bilwa, āruka, mūlaka, atasi, nikocaka, akṣoda, karaṇja and śigru–these are vegetable sources of uncting substance. As regards the animal source, fish, quadruped animals and birds come under this group. their curd, milk, ghee, meat, muscle-fat and (bone) marrow are used as uncting substance. [10-11]

सर्वेषां तेलजातानां तिलतेलं विशिष्यते । बलाय स्नेहने चाध्यमेतद्यु तु विशेषत् ॥१२॥
(कर्षणां तेलपीयेषां कातालेऽमिघर् यूः । काषाचारयतालेऽस्मिन् योनिति विशेषिणि ॥१२॥)

Of all the oils, tila oil is the best one for strength and unction while castor oil is best for purgation. [12]

(Castor oil is pungent, hot, heavy and alleviates vāta and kapha. It also alleviates pitta if combined with (drugs of) astringent, sweet and bitter groups.) [1]

सर्पिस्तेलं वसा मज्जा सर्वस्नेहोत्तमा मताः । एषु चैवोत्तमं सर्पिः संस्काराच्यानुवर्तनात् ॥१३॥
