XIII]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    89

passages, promotes strength and refreshes the body, sense organs and mind. Those
who are suffering from eruptions, boils, pimples, itching, eczema, leprosy, urinary
disorders, and vātarakta; do not take to much food, have soft bowels and average
strength should take the medium dose. This dose is hardly liable to complication,
does not cause too much weakness, uncts with ease. This is used for evacuation. The
old, the children, the delicate, the ease-living, those for which the empty bowels are
not beneficial, have low digestion and are suffering from chronic fever, diarrhoea and
cough, have poor strength, should take the low dose of unction. This is easy in pre-
cautions, is unctuous and nourishing, promotes virility and strength, is free from com-
plication and continues for long. [29-40]

वातपित्तप्रकृयो यावियुतिकारिणः । चक्षुःकामाः श्लःाः क्षीणा वृद्धा बालाश्च बालयोषाः॥ ११४१।।
आयुःकाङ्क्षीत्काम्याः बलवर्णदरार्थिनः । पुंसत्काभाः मंगःकाभाः सौकुमार्याभिवाञ्छयः॥ ११४२।।
दीप्त्योजःस्मृतिमेधाप्राणेन्द्रियबलैषिणः । विषेषु सर्पिर्दग्धाश्च दाहशस्त्राभिघातिनः॥ ११४३।।

Those having constitution predominant in vāta and pitta, afflicted with disorders
of vāta and pitta, desirous of good vision, injured, wasted, the old, the children, women,
desiring long life, strength, complexion, voice, nourishment, progeny, delicacy, bril-
liance, immunity, memory, intellect, appetite and strong sense organs, and injured
with burns, weapons, poisons and fire should take ghee. [41-43]

प्रश्वशलेश्ममेदकाग्नलशूलमलोदरा: । बालस्याविभरास्निग्धा बालचुलस्य च ।।११४४।।
बले तद्वर्ष तद्वर्षं दृष्टिगन्धार्थमोदिनः । निलमलत्वमायुक्तः क्रिमिदेहिनः ।।११४५।।
कृमिकोष्ठाः कृतकोष्ठांश्च वातविशेषिताः: । विषेषु शीताले काले तैलं तैलोभिवाञ्छयः।।११४६।।

Those having increased kapha and fat, with moving and plumpy neck and abdo-
men, afflicted with vātika disorders, having vātika constitution, desirous of strength,
sliminess, lightness, firmness, stability of body parts and unctuous, smooth and thin
skin; afflicted with worms and sinuses, having hard bowels and habituated to oil should
take oil in cold season. [44-46]

वातलसदा ये च बक्षा भारिभस्कजिनिः । सेवुष्फलयोनिविरः निभितवायुदेशमः।।११४७।।
अविस्नोगिसिरास्त्रायुकोष्ठभार: । बलाढ्यवात्निलेषां बलसालस्यपाखुनाः ।।११४८।।
महाव्याप्रिलाये बर्षः बसास्लात्पा ये नः: । तेषो मेदःपिच्छताश्च वचापार्ये विषोषो ।।११४९।।

And those who are lean, emaciated due to weight-
carrying and travelling on foot, one having semen and blood dried up, and kapha
and fat absorbed, are afflicted with severe disorders of bone joints, veins, ligaments,
vital parts and belly, have strong vāta having covered all the passages, with excellent
power of digestion and are accustomed to muscle-fat should take it when they require
unction. [47-49]

17 C.S.-I
