चतुर्दशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XIV

अथातः स्वेदाध्यायं व्याख्यास्याम: ।।१।।

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on fomentation. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।२।।

As propounded by Lord Atreya. [2]

अत: स्वेदः वातश्वने दैर्घचातवातोपीतैः । स्वेदाध्यायः प्रशाम्यन्ति गदा वातकफात्मकाः: ।।३।।
स्वेदपूर्वं प्रयुक्तेन स्वेदनादैतेऽनिलो: । गृहीषुमूत्रतो तस्मात् समगति कफश्च ।।४।।
शुक्काचार्यि हि काचानि स्वेदनोपचयादपि । नायाति नवानामपि किं पुनर्जीषणो रात्रे ।।५।।

Now, the types of fomentation will be described by proper application of which the diseases due to vāta and kapha and amenable to fomentation are alleviated. By application of fomentation, prior unction having been done, vāta is won over and thus faeces, urine and semen are never obstructed. Even the dry pieces of wood bend after proper application of oil and heat then what is to be said about the living human beings? [3-5]

रोगहेतुयादिलांशेण नास्त्युपयोगि स्वेदः कार्बकरो मत: ।।६।।

Fomentation is said as effective if applied with consideration of disease, season and the diseased; is not too hot or too mild, combined with proper drugs and arranged in proper place. [6]

व्याधी शीता शरीरे च महता स्वेदो महागले हि ।।७।। इदृते दुर्बलः स्वेदे मध्यमं मध्यमो गले ।
वातश्लेष्मणि चाते वा बुके या स्वेदे इन्द्रते । निम्नरूक्षसनला नियत्यो रूक्षश्चायुपर्पजितः ।।८।।

In diseases due to cold and strong persons strong fomentation is prescribed. In weak and medium persons it should be mild and medium respectively. Fomentation is beneficial in vāta-kapha or vāta or kapha. That should be unctuous-rough, unctuous and rough respectively. [7-8]

आमाशयगते वाते कफे पक्काशयाश्रिते । रूक्षपूर्वं हि: स्वेदः स्नेपूर्वस्तदेव च ।।९।।

In case of vāta located in āmāśaya and kapha located in pakvāśaya, fomentation should be followed by rough and unctuous measures respectively. [9]

वृषणे हृदयं इदृते स्वेदयेन्नैव तं व मः । मध्यमं स्वेदने सक्थ्यो शेषभाग्येन सम्मतः ।।१०।।११।।

Testicles, heart and eyes should not be fomented, or if necessary, should be mildly fomented. In groins medium type of fomentation should be applied. In remaining parts of body, fomentation should be applied as necessary. [10]

सुश्रुतेर्नेकैः पिच्छया गोमूत्रामापया वा । एकोलासपनालीभिः स्वेदः संवृत्त चक्षुषी ।।११।।
पुष्टासपीतः शीताभिः शीतलीयोभिर्नेत्रैः । जलधारैर्जलेनैच तिस्रतो हृदयं स्मृतेत् ।।१२।।

In case of vāta located in āmāśaya, fomentation should be given — and, or if necessary, should be mildly fomented. In groins medium type of fomentation of body, fomentation should be applied as necessary. [10]
