102                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

धीतीकां तु कूरीघायां यथोक्तानां प्रदीयते । शयनात्प्रयाणे शय्यामुपरि तत्र च ।।६१।।
सुदग्धायां विधूमायां यथोक्तामुपकल्पयेत् । स्वयंदक्षः स्वयंलग्धघः स्थिताः न सुखम् ।।६२।।

A heap of the dung of the aforesaid animals is ignited below the cot according
to its size. When the ground becomes well-heated and smokeless, the cot, well-
equipped, should be put over it. Now the patient, priorly well-massaged, lies down
on the cot, well-covered and thus gets fomented comfortably. Thus Holāka sveda,
pleasure-giving is described by the great sage. [61-62]

होलाकस्वेद इत्येष सूक्षः प्रोक्तो महर्षिणा । तिते स्वेदस्त्रिगुणसंखः ।।६३।।

Thus fomentation of thirteen types is described where the properties are de-
pendent on (application of) fire. [63]

व्यायाम उष्णसदन गुरुशारणं क्षुधा । बहुपान भयकोधायुदनाहातपाः ।।६४।।

Physical exercise, heated house, heavy clothings, hunger, excessive drining,
fear, anger, bandage, fighting, the sun–these ten foment the person without
(application of) fire. [64]

स्वेदयात दशैताति नत्रमग्नियुक्तते । इत्युक्तो द्विविधः स्वेदः संयुक्तोऽग्निगुणैर्विना च ।।६५।।
एकाङ्गसर्वाङ्गयुक्तः च । इत्येतासासि द्वन्द्व स्वेद्युरीध्यं सतिगिः ।।६६।।

Thus the fomentation is said of two types. Apart from this, there are fomentations
applied to one part or the whole body, and unctuous or non-unctuous. Thus three
duals in relation to fomentation have been mentioned. [65-66]

निगमः: स्वेदनाकयः: पश्यात्मनि भवेत् । तताः: तिव्रगात्रस्तु व्यायाम वर्जयेत् ।।६७।।

Fomentation should be applied after unction, fomented person should take
wholesome diet and after fomentation, he should avoid physical exercise on
that day. [67]

तत्र श्लोकाः—

स्वेदो तया कार्यकरो हितो यम्भूध पाद्यः । पत्र देशे यया कोणी देशो रक्षणं यो पचां ।१८८।।
तिव्रतिस्तिस्वतण्याणि स्वातिस्तिस्वयस्तिच्यदेः । संलेखो: स्वेदप्रवाणीं स्वेदद्वाणीं कल्पना ।।६९।।
स्वेदोसाहिकाराः: स्वेदो विना क्षाशस्वयस्तिद्यः: । संयोहे च यिना स्वेदो वद् स्वेद: ।।७०।।
स्वेदाधिकाराः त्रयाम्लानात्मनेनेर्वणि । शिष्यैस्तु प्रतिशाण्याप्युद्देशं पुनर्वसुः ।।७१।।

Now (the summing up) verses–

How fomentation is effective, for whom it is beneficial, types of fomentation,
application and protection of different parts, symptoms of under-fomentation and
over-fomentation, treatment of over-fomentations, persons suitable and unsuitable for
fomentation, drugs for fomentation, management, thirteen types of fomentation, ten
types of fomentation without fire, six-fold fomentation–these, in breif, have been de-
scribed in this chapter of fomentation.
