XVI]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                          103

    Whatever was to be said about fomentation has been said by the great sage.
Here the preceptor is Punarvasu and the disciples have to follow. [68-71]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने स्वेदाध्यायो
नाम चतुर्दशोऽध्यायः ।।१४।।

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter on fomentation in Ślokasthāna in the
treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (14).

•

पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XV

अथात उपकल्पनीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ।।१।।

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on arrangement of accessories etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।२।।

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

इह खलु राजानं राजमात्रयं वा विशुद्धर्थ्यं वमनं विरेचनं वा पाययितुकामेन भिषजा प्रागेवौषधपाचनात्
संभार उपकल्पनीया भवन्ति सम्पद्भेः हि गङ्खातीयते प्रतीभोगाभ्यां; व्याप्ते चौषधे व्ययात् परिरक्षणाय
प्रतीकाराभ्यां; न हि सर्वत्रैव कालें प्राङ्भूयमानापापि सर्वेषु द्रव्यकारणु सुकराणां संभारणापसेषां यदावदिति ।।३।।

The physician, who wants to administer emetic or purgative to a king, a kingly
or a wealthy person, has to arrange the necessary equipments before-hand, in order
to provide pleasure in case of the drug being favourable and counter-action in that of
complications arisen keeping in view the nature of complications. Because it is not
possible to arrange for the proper drugs easily and immediately, in spite of the arrangement
of sale and import, in case of emergency occured, where there is no time. [3]

एवंवादिनि भगवत्यात्रेयेऽपि उपाय–नु भगवन् । आदावेव ज्ञानवता तथा प्रतिविधातव्यम् यथा प्रतिविधानेन
सिध्येदेवौषधकर्मेति, सम्यक्प्रयोगनिमित्त हि सर्वकर्मणि सिध्दिरिति, व्यापत्समवायप्रयोगनिमित्त; अथ सम्यगसम्यग्
च समारब्धं कर्म सिध्यत्यथ वा सिध्यते इति, तुल्यं भवति ज्ञानाज्ञानयोरिति ।।४।।

When Lord Ātreya said this, Agniveśa submitted–O Lord! a learned physician
should counteract in such a way in the beginning itself that the treatment succeeds
surely and invariably, it is said that the success of treatment is achieved by proper
administration and its failure is due to improper administration, but (as observed)
treatment began properly or improperly succeeds or fails without any rule, showing
