108                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

On proper administration of drug when the patient has vomited well, he should wash hands, feet and face well and after having been assured for a while, he should use one of the three types (unctuous, evacuative and pacifying) of smoking according to his strength. Then he should take ablution. [14]

उपयुक्तिदेने वैनं निकातनगानानुपदेश संवेश चार्शिभ्याम्–उक्ष्वोभिन्यायरत्मगतिस्थानगतिवेढ़ुक्रमणे क्रोधशोक-हिमातपायतापातयातन यत्नपाने संभाषणसेवन विशि दिव्य रात्र विस्तृतविदेशगमितासम्यकालिभोजनहिताहितम्-वेगसध्यारेणीतिभमिहि भावनेतात्महभ्यासभोजनपम् सदैव गायपत्विति स तथा कुर्यात् ।।१५।।

After this, the patient should be taken into a wind-free room and be asked to lie down, then be instructed as "loud speaking, too much sitting, standing or walking, anger, grief, snow, the sun, dew, storm, travelling on vehicles, sexual intercourse, night keeping, day-sleep; antagonistic, during indigestion, unwholesome, untimely, less in quantity and nutritive value, heavy or irregular diet; suppression or propulsion of natural urges–these should not be observed even in thought and thus the whole day should be passed: the patient should do like that. [15]

अर्थं सापहे प्रे आडारे दुखोदकपरिषिक्त सुरागाले लोहितशालिलतवुलानि स्वविशिलता मण्डपूर्वं सक्षोणीं चवतुं पायवेदेपिरकतभिमसयीय, एवं द्वितीये तृतीये चाक्षकाले, चतुर्थे लवणाविनामेंव शालिनीपण्डुत्सकाचिडीमतिमलवणां वा भोजने, एवं पंचमे षष्ठे चाक्षकाले, सप्तमे लवणाकं लवाविधानमेंव शालिनि विप्रसां सुविनप्रमत्यनपोदकान्यनुपानं तनु लघुलेकटवागणोपसेचं मुद्गयूषं भोजनेत् , सुखाले रुचि चाक्षकाले, दशमे लवाकाके लोहितशालिभोजनस्य मांसतनवमेकालपायासमारसमेकों नात्यसरक चाक्षकाले तनु लवणाकं भावनमोदकानुसारं मोजनेत् चान्द्रसीकाले एकादशे द्वादशे वा अर्थप्रभुजनपुरुषाः क्रमेणोपचितकालायोग्यभुञ्जानाः प्राकृतिभोजनमागच्छेयुः ।।१६।।

Then in the same evening or next morning, after taking ablution with lukewarm water, he should take, according to his appetite, the lukewarm, well-cooked, scummy gruel of red rice. This is repeated in second and third meal-times. In fourth meal-time, well-cooked paste-like preparation of red rice along with warm water should be taken without or with a little uncting substance and salt. The same is followed in fifth and six meal-times. At the seventh meal-time he should take well-cooked red rice alongwith dilute green gram soup mixed up with a little uncting substance and salt; and warm water should be taken after food. This is to be repeated for eighth and ninth meal-times. In tenth meal-time (cooked rice), alongwith light and dilute meat soup of birds like common quail, grey partridge etc. added with salt should be taken and after food warm water is to be taken. This is followed in eleventh and twelfth meal-times. After this, the patient assimilating nutrition from the diet gradually, should revert to normal diet in seven nights. [16]
