XVI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                109

अर्वन् पुनरेव स्नेहस्वेदाभ्यामुपधानादुपतनवसरभिसमीक्ष्य सुखोचितं सुखजीर्णभक्तं कृतहोमबलिमङ्गलाचार-
क्षितिगते विधियन्त्रक्षरणपुरुषं ब्राह्मणाः स्वस्ति वाचयित्वा तिथ्यृक्षकरणमुहूर्ता यबाहितोडयोग्रतिविविर्तं पाययेत्,
प्रसक्ष्य दोषभेदप्रदेशकालबलशरीरसत्त्वसात्म्यप्रकृतिवयसांचानुभागानि विकाराणि, सम्यक् विरिक्तं चैनं
वमनमैत्रैर नियमैर्विनियुयोज्यात्प्रतिग्रहात्, कल्याणप्रकृतिः समुन्नधित चैनपुतनवसरभिसमीक्ष्य सुखोचितं सुखजीर्णं-
भक्तं शिरः:स्नानमलानुलेपनसर्वेगन्धमृदुपतनवसरभिसंयोगमनुपूर्वशारालं सुदारं दर्शयित्वा शृतीनि दर्शयित्वा,
अर्वन् काम्यवासुजीत् ॥११॥

(For administration of purgative) the patient should again be prepared by
subjecting him to unction and fomentation. Thereafter, when he is cheerful, seated
comfortably, has food well-digested, has done oblation, offering, auspicious and
expiatory rites, after recitation of svastivācana (mantras wishing well-being) by
brāhmaṇas, on a day having auspicious tithi, nakṣatra, karaṇa and muhūrta, he should
be asked to take the paste of trivṛt (a purgative drug) in the dose of karṣa (10 gm.)
suspended in a proper vehicle. The drug should be administered keeping in view the
conditions of disorder, drug, place, time, strength, body, diet, wholesomeness, mind,
constitution and age and also the disorders. When the patient is purgated well, he
should follow the regimen except smoking as said in the context of emesis till he
regains strength, complexion and normalcy. When he is endowed with strength and
complexion, is cheerful, comfortable and with his food well-digested, he should take
bath by head, annoint his body, wear garland, put on undamaged dress and wear
suitable ornaments. Then he should meet his friends and kinsmen and be allowed to
do his normal duties. [17]

भवति चात्र–
अनेन विधिना राजा राजमाहोऽबका पुन: । यस्य वा विदुलं द्रव्यं स स संशोधनमर्हति ॥१८॥

Here are (the verses)–

By this method, the king, the kingly and that having immense wealth can be treated
with evacuatives. [18]

दरिद्रस्यापि प्राप्य प्रायकालें विशोधनम् । विकृत् कामयसंभूयं संभारानपि दुर्लभान् ॥१९॥
न हि सर्वेमनुष्याणां सत्ति सर्वे परिष्करः। न च रोग स बालन्ते दरिद्रानपि दारुणाः ॥२०॥
यवाचक्रवर्म मनुष्योण कर्तुभीदमप्यादि । तस्मा देख्यं सग्रहींषासंशान्तिः वसनाशनावि च ॥२१॥

The poor too in case of a disorder requiring evacuation may take the drug even
without collecting the rare equipments. Because all men do not have all the requisite
means and it is also not that the severe diseases do not attack the poor ones. Hence
one should take, in case of affliction, the treatment and also the cloths and diets
according to his means. [19-21]
