114                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                            [CH

    The merits of the well-equipped physician and the demerits of the otherwise,
symptoms of adequate, inadequate and excessive evacuation; symptoms of the one
having plenty of doṣa, merits of evacuative therapy, principle of treatment in rela-
tion to its success and failure, rationale in therapeutics, functions of physician—
all this has been said by the sage in the chapter of the physician equipped for treat-
ment etc. [39-40]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने चिकित्साप्रभृतीये
नाम चोदशोऽध्यायः ॥१६॥

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter on physician equipped for treatment etc.
   in Ślokasthāna in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and
                    redacted by Caraka (16).

समाप्तः कल्पनाचतुष्कः ॥४॥

Here ends the fourth quadruplet on preparation (4).

•

सप्तदशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XVII

अथातः किंवतां शिरसीमहृदयानां व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on the number of head diseases etc. [1]

इइति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

किंवतः शिरसि प्रोक्ता रोगा हृदि च देहिनाम् । कति धातुविकाराणां रोगा मानविकल्पनाः ॥३॥
क्षयः कति समाग्राहाः पिडकाः कति चानघ । गतिः कतिविधा दोषाणां दोषाणां दोषवृद्धेः ॥४॥
हृत्प्रतिवेश्य वातस्तुल्या गुरुतरावीड् । प्रवासासि यत् सोम्य तन्मे गृणु सविस्तरतः ॥५॥
दूषाः षड् शिरोरोगाः पञ्च इत्याचार्यमाः । व्यामिनां इत्यविका षड़ेर्मानिककल्पनाः ॥६॥
दश च क्षयाः सप्त पिडका वागुमोहिनीः । दोषाणां विविधा धोका गतिर्मिर्लिस्तरतः गणु ॥७॥

(Agniveśa asked)–How many diseases are pertaining to head and heart?
How many disorders are due to proportional variations of vāta etc.? How many
are wastings? and how many boils? what are the types of movement of doṣas? O
alleviator of doṣas! (tell me).

    Having heard the questions of Agniveśa, the preceptor (Lord Ātreya) said–
O gentle, hear my detailed reply to your questions. Five are the head diseases
and also the heart diseases. There are sixty two disorders which arise due to pro-
