XVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              117

vātika heart disease, the symptoms are–trembling, cramps, stiffness, fainting, vacant
look, tearning pain and aggravation of pain when the food is digested. [30-31]

उण्यापलवगाञ्जारकदुःकाजीर्णभोजने: । वचशोधातैश्च्यांशु हृदि पितं सकुष्यति ॥३२॥
हृदाहतिककां वंके रिकाकसलेदुगरणं मल्दः । तृष्ण मूर्छा घृमः स्वेदः पित्तजहोगलक्षणम् ॥३३॥

Hot, sour, salty, alkaline and pungent food, eating during indigestion, wines,
anger and the sun vitiate the pitta in the heart. In this pittaja heart disease, these
symptoms appear–burning sensation in cardiac region, bitterness in mouth, bitter
and sour eructation, exhaustion, thirst, fainting, giddiness and perspiration. [32-33]

अत्यादनं गुरुस्निग्धयचिन्तनयशेषम् । दिवासुप्तं वायुमर्थिकं कफजहृद्रोगकारणम् ॥३४॥
हृदयं कफजहृद्रोगे पुनः स्निग्धमभिभारितः । तत्रान्द्यपरितोषश्च स्वलाघवमाचुतं यथा ॥३५॥

Kaphaja heart disease is caused by excessive intake, use of heavy and unctuous
substances, little mental and physical work and indulgence in sleep. In this the patient
suffers from drowsiness and anorexia and feeling of numbness, cold and weight in
the cardiac region as if it is pressed with stone. [34-35]

हेतुलक्षणसंन्निधुक्तो सत्रिपतितिकः ।
(वृत्तेः कफदः कफश्याय डको महाजीर्णः: विदोषेण तु हृद्रोगे यो दुरात्म निवेशते ॥३६॥
तिलहरीरशाध्यादिनि मर्मस्तोपयोगतः) । मर्मदेशे संस्लेदो रसलाभोपगमार्गणि ॥३७॥
संक्लेदाद् जितमपेशानु धातुस्व्यतालयः) । मर्मदेशे ते जाताः सर्वेणो यक्ष्मणिन च ॥३८॥
तृष्यमाने तत् हृदयं सूचीभिरिव मत्ते । विध्यमाने वथा शस्त्रैर्जनकैश्च महाव्यथम् ॥३९॥
हृद्रोगं किमिजं स्तैनिगनिधुक्त्यां सुलक्षणम् । वर्जेत येषु तु विद्धुः विकारं शाशीकारिणम् ॥४०॥

When causative factors and symptoms of all the dosas are combined together it
is sānnipātika (produced by combination of all the three dosas).

(Heart disease is troublesome and hardly curable as said by the great sages).

The evil-natured who takes sesamum, milk, jaggery etc. in the heart disease
caused by all the three dosas, suffers from a gland appearing in a portion of the
heart. Moreover, his rasadhātu attains moisture in a portion of the vital organ due to
which organisms develop, spread in the region and lead to decay of the heart. The
patient feels pain as if the heart is pierced by needles or cut by weapons, itching and
intense pain. Diagnosing the case as krimija hṛdroga (heart disease caused by
organisms) on the basis of the above symptoms one should take immediate steps to
overcome the disorder which is emergent as well as severe. [36-40]

क्षुत्वणेत्र्यालोभे: यद् स्त्रीतिमधुसेविकैश विकारसः सत्रिपाताध्यवेषोच्च ॥४४॥
संसों नत् यद् देश्म यकत्कुञ्जदा संभवाः । त्वेदयः व्यक्त तृतीयोद्धितयेः इकाशिहिताः ॥४२॥
यथा युदाह्याश्च क्तेतिभिः स्युः सुत्रितत्षाश्मनि । सृत्रिदेशस्यय संतुच्छ उत्पद्यात्मनि उत्पदेशे ॥४३॥
सृत्रिरेकस्य समया चीकलनैकत्यं संस्थः । इन्द्रयोहिः क्षमहीपंस्त्र्युपर्विहि: श्वमः ॥४४॥

The combination of all the three aggravated dosas is of thirteen types–two dosas
dominating (3), one dosa dominating (3), dosas in diminished, moderate and domi-
