XVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              121

गुर्विस्न्ग्धाम्ललवणान्यतिद्रुतं सम्प्रधातु । नवधान्यं च पानं च विद्याम्मासुखाषि च ।।७६।।
लयाक्ष्याचामिनासं संशोऽनसकुर्वताम् । श्लेष्मा पित्तं च मेदञ्च मांसं वाविप्रवर्धते ।।७९।।
तैरावृतगतिर्विष्ठुरोग आदाघ गर्भ्यते । यदा बलिं यदा हृत्सु मधुमेहः प्रवर्तते ।।८०।।
स मातस्य विषस्य काचस्य च सुह्मुयुः । हरणस्यापकृष्टो गत्वा क्षयमाप्याति पुनः ।।८१।।
उपेक्ष्यमाण्यम् जायन्ते पिडका: सप्त दारुणाः । मांसास्थेष्वावकारेषु मर्मस्वित्र च सन्धिषु ।।८२।।

In the person eating heavy, unctuous, sour and saline substances in excessive
quantity and also the new grains and fresh drinks, having over sleep and sedentary
habit, having abstained-from physical and mental work and also neglecting evacua-
tion, kapha, pitta, māṃsa and medas aggravated excessively and they all obstruct the
path of vāta which carries the ojas to Basti (urinary passage) and thus the obstinate
madhumeha (diabetes mellitus) arises. It shows the symptoms of vāta, pitta and kapha
now and then after diminution again develops. If it is overlooked seven severe piḍakās
(boils) arise in muscular areas, vital parts and joints. [78-82]

शाराविका कच्छपिका जालिनी सर्षपी तथा । अलजी विनताञ्चेव च विद्वधी चेति सप्तमी ।।८३।।
अजोऽला मृद्वसनया शथ्या कठेऽत्रजातिः । शाराविका श्याव पिडका शरावाकृतिरीरिता ।।८४।।
अवगाढाविस्तीर्णो महायाताभूपिष्ठगा । श्लेष्मण कच्छपाकृत्यो पिडका कच्छपी मता ।।८५।।
सम्बा शिरारालतासीतिनिर्भसया महाशया । रुगनिर्मोहसंयुक्ता मुखसूक्ष्म्ऽड़ा च जालिनी ।।८६।।
पिडका नातिवृहती हिमायाका महाशया । सर्षपी सर्षभागाभा: पिडकाभिश्चिता भवेत् ।।८७।।
दहति त्वचमुखान्ते मूर्च्छामोजनजारात् । विसर्पिणीनां दुःखावहयथापित्ताभिवर्धती ।।८८।।
अवगाढमहास्रवेण पृष्ठे वाऽभ्युदरेऽपि च । महती विनता नीला पिडका विनता मता ।।८९।।

These piḍakās (boils) are seven–śārāvikā, kacchapikā, jālinī, sarṣapī, vinatā and
vidradhī.

The śārāvika type of boils is raised at margins, depressed in centre, blackish in
colour, has moisture and pain and looks like an earthen saucer.

The kacchapikā type has deeper pain particularly of piercing nature, covers a
wide area, is smooth and similar to the back of tortoise.

The jālinī type of boil is stiff, has venous network, unctuous discharge, big base,
excessive pain particularly of piercing nature and minute openings.

The sarṣapī type is not very big, quickly suppurating, very painful and having
mustard-like (small) boils.

The alaṣī type of boil, at the time of appearance, causes burning sensation in
skin, thirst, fainting and fever; spreads over and constantly produces terrible burning
pain like fire.

The vinatā type of boil has deep pain and thick discharge, appears in back or
abdomen, is big, depressed and blue. [83-89]

विद्रधिं द्विविधमाघाबुह्याभ्यन्तरती तथा । बाह्या त्वचस्थापामांसस्तो काष्ठाराध महाशया ।।९०।।
शीतिकाश्चास्थिशाखासुःक्षरणुपातिभोजनात् । विस्राभिर्वांसविलेहविहित्मासात्मभोजनात् ।।९१।।

21 C.S. - I
