122                          CARAKA-SAMHITA                          [CH

व्यापश्नुवद्यलादेगंसंधाराणाश्चमुत् । विदध्यात्यापश्नयातिताराप्यथुग्ब्युत् ।।९९।।
अन:शरीरे मांसयापाविभिन्ने पदा मल: । तदा संभवते थर्मिभाशीरस्य: सुहरस्य: ।।९९।।
हृदये क्लोमिं कुष्ठी प्लीहि कृष्ठी च बृहुयो: । नाभ्यां संहायोऽवेधिरे श्रेणी च गुल्दे वा: ।।९४।।
दुरासनीमाजत्नान् स वे श्लोग्रे विद्धाते । तत: संविधित्वातिसारिहृद्धिषाभ्यभिभूयते ।।९५।।
व्यापश्नेद्वयमनाहश्चस्पुदुरासनीद्यात् । तालिखी: पीड़िखी संभ्यायाश्चयोणमोद्यादर: ।।९६।।
नृभ्भोलष्ठेशारिचिसतश्यापशीली: किसु: । संवोधु व मङ्कुसूरे विदध्यीपुरसर्यते ।।९७।।
झाश्रार्भितस्त इव बोन्चुखेकिर हुआते । विदध्यी व्यपनाते यात: सुहिंशिरे दरमाते ।।९८।।
ते मु झक्राणग्रं स्यास्य कोनिसे वालिंविदध्यी । लिसेग्यतपुलतलदेनोविद्धिये विसिविदध्यी ।।९९।।
प्रतिभिखी स्थवाति ते तिग्निसूतां हवत बड् । लक्षणं सर्वविदेश्यसूनि सर्वतिभिखी ।।१००।।

Vidradhi (abscess) is of two types—external and internal. The external one is
located in skin, ligament and muscle, resembles tendon and is very painful.

By intake of winter cereals, burning, hot, rough and dry food, taking antagonis-
tic, during indigestion, mixed up, irregularly and unwholesome diet; drinking
damaged and plenty of wine, suppression of urges, fatigue, complicated physical
exercise and sleep, excessive weight-carrying, travelling on foot and sexual inter-
course; when dosas in body affect the māmsa and rakta, deep-seated, painful and
severe gland like node appears in cardiac region, kloman, liver, spleen, lumbar
region, kidneys, navel, groins or urinary bladder. Because of having impure blood in
abundance it gets quickly inflamed and that is why it is called as vidradhi (that causes
vidāha-inflammation). In vidradhi predominant in vāta, perforating and cutting pain,
giddiness, distension, sound, throbbing and spreading characters are there. In paittika
type, thirst, burning sensation, fainting, narcosis and fever while in kaphaja type yawn-
ing, nausea, anorexia, stiffness and shivering are there. In all types of abscess,
intense pain is the main symptom. The pain may be of various natures such as cutting,
burning or stinging. (As regards the character of discharge), it is thin, rough, reddish
or blackish and foamy in vātika vidradhi; resembling soup of sesamum, black gram
and kulattha in paittika vidradhi and white, slimy, thick and abundant in kaphaja
vidradhi. The sānnipātika type (caused by the combination of all the three doṣas) has
got all the above symptoms. [99-100]

अत्रयो विदध्यीनां राप्याग्यलात्रविबिपुवेत्तनत् त्नाश्चनिं लिग्विशोनुपुरदेश्यात्ः—तत भागत पर्भिजानी हिडचनां
हृद्धुतनरकायोभेकाशदाभ्यत्रे:, बलगोलेजांच विपायामुखग्रयोणप्राणस्ये:, वहुद्भावांश्च दार:, प्लीहिरायोवुभुत्सोयरे:,
कृहिज्ञात्या कृहिज्ञाविनांतस्थूर:, सुलायांसे प्रणस्तविदेश्यः:, नातिजात्यां विद्धा, मेश्यजात्यां नातिविस्तारते:, वलतिजात्यां
कण्ठर्दुपुरुर्चर्चत्रो श्रेणे ।।१ ।।

Now (I) shall tell about the particular symptoms according to location of
vidradhis for the knowledge of prognosis. In vidradhi located in the main vital
organ (heart), there will be palpitation, feeling of darkness before eyes, cough
and dyspnoea; in that located in kloman, there will be thirst, dryness of mouth and
