124                        CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                        [CH

(Apart from these) there are other types of boils such as those having red, yellow, black, reddish, pale, yellowish, ash-like and deep black colour. Some are soft while others are hard; some are big while some are small; some of them are slow-growing while others are fast-growing; some are mildly painful while others are intensely painful. After observing them, one should diagnose according to the respective causes and symptoms of vāta etc. and treat them immediately before complication develops. Thus, dyspnoea, gangrene, fainting, hiccup, narcosis, fever, metastasis and obstruction in vital organs–these are the complications of boils. [108-111]

क्षयः स्थानं च सुविज्ञः दोषाणां त्रिधा गतिः । ऊर्ध्वं चाधस्तात् तिर्यक्च त्रिधैव त्रिधाऽभ्यागारम् ।।११२।।
त्रिधा धातरा कोष्ठशाखामर्मास्थिसन्धिषु । झूलका विधियेदेनं दोषाणां त्रिधा गतिः ।।११३।।
वचाकाकोपागमः पिच्चदीनां वचाबागमः । भवत्युर्जैकालः शेटु कालेयभागमतिः ।।११४।।

Diminution, normalcy and aggravation are three kinds of movement of dosas. The other threefold movement is upward downward and oblique and the other three types are movement in belly, extremities (dhātus) and marmāsthi-sandhi (vital organs and bone joints). Thus threefold movement of dosas is said.

Accumulation, vitiation and pacification of pitta, kapha and vāta occurs in seasons of rains etc. respectively¹. Thus conditioning is natural by the effect of seasonal changes. [112-114]

गतिः कालकृता चैषा वचाद्या पुरुष्यते । गतिद्विर्धा पाकिरनाणप्युजायते । शब्द भिर्ये प्राकृतिं विकाराश्च कुर्वते बहूः ।।११५।।
प्राकृतस्तु बलं उलूखा विकृतो मल उद्यते । स चवीजः स्यूतः काये स च पाम्योदित्यते ।।११७।।
सर्वाः हि चेष्टा वातेन स भगः प्राणिनां स्यूः । नैवं रोगा जायन्ते तेन चैवोपद्रवते ।।११८।।

Again, (dosas) is of two types–normal and abnormal. For instance, pitta, having the nature of heat, is responsible for digestion in living beings but when vitiated it causes many disorders. Kapha, in normal state, is (responsible for) strength but when abnormal becomes excretion. In other words, the normal kapha is said as ojas while the abnormal one is sinful (cause of various disorders). Likewise, all the movements are due to (normal) vāta and it is taken as life breath of the living beings but in abnormal state it produces disorders even obstructing the life breath. [115-118]

──────────────────────
1. Pitta is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in rainy season, autumn and early winter respectively. Kapha is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in early winter, spring and summer respectively. Vāta is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in summer, rainy season and autumn respectively.
