XVIII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              125

नित्यं सतिहितामिवं समीक्ष्याशानात्मापान् । नित्यं युक्तः पश्चिरेदिक्षुवापुरितस्रम् ।।११९।।

The self-controlled person, observing himself as always surrounded by enemies,
should always cautiously manage himself with a desire to have a long life. [119]

तव श्लोकौ—
शिरोरोगा: सहृदोग रोग मानविकल्पश्यः । क्षया: सारिष्कक्षोक्षा दोषाणां गतिरेव च ।।१२०।।
किञ्चत: शिरसीदेहिसमत्रमाये तत्त्वदर्शिना । झानार्थं भिषजां येव प्रमाणं च विलिखिना ।।१२१।।

Now (the summing up) verses—
Head diseases alongwith heart diseases, diseases arisen due to proportional vari-
ations, diminutions, boils, movements of doṣas–all this has been explained by the
seer of realities and wishing welfare of the people in this chapter on the number of
head diseases for the knowledge of physicians. [120-121]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तेव चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने किञ्चत:शिरसीयो
नाम सप्तदशोऽध्यायः ।।१७।।

Thus ends the seventeenth chapter on the number of head diseases in
Ślokasthāna in the treatise composed by Agniveśa redacted
by Caraka. (17)

                              *

                        अष्टादशोऽध्यायः
                          CHAPTER XVIII

अशातविकशोचीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ।।१।।

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on thee swellings etc. [1]

इति हि मग्ला भगवातात्रेयः ।।२।।

As propounded by Lord Atreya. [2]

त्रयः शोधा वायति वातपित्तश्लेष्मनिमित्ताः; ते पुनर्द्विविधा विजानगुणभेदेन ।।३।।

There are three (types of) swelling caused by vāta, pitta and kapha. They are
again of two types–innate and exogenous. [3]

तमागतमवछेदन्यभेदनशातनुक्षापिविष्यणोत्पेषणाहतप्यवनन्दनबन्धनपीडनभेदिभिषां भल्लातकपुष्पकलात्रामल-
गुणांशुककिंशिगुकादितव्यलावगुणुमात्र्यूणिर्वी स्लेदनपरिसर्पणानृत्सूणिर्वी विविधो साविष्कपादिदंष्टुत्लविषाणाभिर्विपितां
सागरविषाब्दाभिभव्यसन्त्यणिर्वी शोधा: मृमुच्यान्यते ।।१२।।

The exogenous swellings are caused by excision, incision, injury, breaking,
hinderance, grinding, heating, stroking, binding, twisting, piercing, pressing, or
by contact of the juice of flowers and fruits of bhallātaka, bristles, kapikacchu and
insects, harmful (poisonous) leaves, creepers and shrubs or by sweating, crawling,
