XVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                127

यथास्वकारणकृतिसंसर्गाद्द्विदोषजाश्च: शोथा भवन्ति; यथास्वकारणकृतिसंप्रयातात् सांनिपातिक एकः;
एवं सावियभे भेदः ११।।

Special features are as follows:—

Vāyu, vitiated by cold, rough, light, non-slimy substance, fatigue, fasting, excessive emaciation and wasting etc. overcoming the twak, māmsa, rakta etc. produces swelling. This is quickly arising and subsiding. The part affected becomes blackish or reddish or has normal complexion, moving, pulsating, with skin and hair coarse, rough and broken. The person feels that part as if excised, incised, pressed, pierced with needles, crawled over by ants, has irritating sensation as if pasted with mustard, contracts or expands. This is (the character of) vāta śotha (swelling due to vāta). (1);

Pitta, vitiated with intake of hot, sharp, pungent, alkaline, salt, sour food and during indigestion, and heating with fire and the sun, overcomes the twak, māmsa and rakta and thus produces swelling. It quickly arises and subsides. The part affect has black, yellow, blue and coppery tinge, hot, soft and with brown and coppery hairs. It has burning sensations of various natures, is hot, perspiring, moist and likes the contact of hot things. This is (character of) pitta śotha (swelling due to pitta). (2);

Kapha, vitiated by use of heavy, sweet, cold and unctuous food; over sleep and absence of exercise etc., overcomes twak, māmsa, rakta etc. and thus produces swelling. It arises and subsides with difficulty. The part affected is pale, unctuous, smooth, stable, thick, with white hair tips and tolerant of touch and heat. This is (the charactor of) kapha-śotha (swelling due to kapha). (3)

By combination of respective causes and symptoms dwidoṣaja (produced by two doṣas combined together) swellings occur which are similar in number. Likewise, by combination of respective causes and symptoms of all the three doṣas sānnipātika swelling arises which is only one. Thus swelling is of seven types. [7]

प्रकृतिभेदसाभिनतिभिर्भेदमानो द्विधायाविर्भवेद्धरिः; सावित्यंठे ठविद्यः शोथ उपवास्ते, पुरठीक एकोलेश-
सामान्यात् ११६।।

From various points of view, swelling is two types (innate and exogenous), of three types (caused by three doṣas separately), of four types (caused by three doṣas and one exogenous), of seven types (caused by three doṣas separately (3)+ by combination of two doṣas (3) + by combination of three doṣas (1)=, of eight types (above seven and one exogenous) but basically, swelling is one having protuberance in common. [8]
