XVIIIJ                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                129

यस्य प्रकुपितं पित्तं शोणिनां ग्राम्य शण्डति । तिलका पिप्पली वध्रा नीलिका तस्य जायते ॥२५॥
यस्य पित्तं प्रकुपितं शङ्खयोरवतिष्ठते । क्षयदुः शङ्कुको नाम क्षारुरास्तस्थाजायते ॥२६॥
यस्य पित्तं प्रकुपितं कर्णमूलेऽवतिष्ठते । ज्वरान्ते दुःखितो नाम शोथनासस्थयोजायते ॥२७॥
वातः श्लीहानमुद्धृत्य कुपितो याति पार्श्वयोः । शनैः परिवृद्धुः पार्श्व चीसी बुद्धिरुपोजायते ॥२८॥
यस्य वायुः प्रकुपितो गुल्मस्थाने३वतिष्ठते । शोफे संजूनं जनयन् गुल्मस्तस्योपजायते ॥२९॥
यस्य वायुः प्रकुपितः वङ्क्षणाच्छुक्रदेशगः । वधुसूत्राणुवृत्ती चपा बुद्धिरुपोजायते ॥३०॥
यस्य वातः प्रकुपितस्त्वग्रक्तांसनार्थाहतः । शोफे संजनव कुक्षौनुत् तस्य जायते ॥३१॥
रोगाश्रयेर्षपसमानाचेदिमाससुदिद्धाः । निर्दिशा नानारूपम्भो निर्देशः शोथसंभवे ॥३२॥
वातापित्तकफा यत्र जिझमुणोर्वनिलण्डने । विजाणिपद्वणाच्छास्त्रं त्रिदोष्यान्त्यापि॥३३॥
जन्मनिन शुद्धं शोथ वेदनाद्यं पुजाचिंत । तं श्रोथकाशिनि रोगे रोगिणति विनिर्दिष्टे ॥३४॥
विरेचनं परं तस्य जलनोर्ति जीविता । कुपलेन लप्तुजान शिरायां सुखी ॥३५॥

The quickly emerging swelling caused by kapha, vitiated and located at the tongue root produces upajihvikā.

The similar swelling cused by kapha, vitiated and located in kākala (uvula) produces galāśuṇḍikā.

The vitiated kapha located outside the throat causes swelling slowly which produces galagaṇḍa (goitre).

When the vitiated kapha, firmly located within the throat causes swelling quickly, it produces kalagraha.

When vitiated pitta alongwith rakta spreads in skin it causes swelling with redness which produces visarpa (erysipelas).

When vitiated pitta is located in skin and rakta, swelling and redness appear which causes pidakā (boils).

When the vitiated pitta goes to rakta and dries up there, it produces tilaka, piplu, vyaṅga and nīlikā.

When the vitiated pitta is located in temporal regions, severe swelling known as śaṅkhaka is produced.

When, at the end of fever, pitta gets vitiated and is located at the roots of the ears, a severe and fatal swelling known as śotha arises.

When the vitiated vāta elevates the spleen producing mild pain in sides, the spleen enlarges.

When the vitiated vāyu is located in the regions of gulma causing swelling and pain, it produces gulma.

When the vitiated vāyu moves from groins to testicles causing swelling and pain, it produces vṛddhi.

22 C.S.-I
