136                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

are caused directly by dosas such as vātika, paittika, kaphaja and sānnipātika. The
remaining sixteen are named after the specific characters evolved due to combination
of dosas and dūsyas such as raktayoni, ara jaskā, acaranā, aticaranā, prākcaranā,
upaplutā, pariplutā, udāvarttini, karoṇī, putrāghnī, antarmukhi, sūcimukhi, śuskā,
vāminī, sandhayoni and mahāyoni. Thus are twenty uterine disorders. (9)

This is simply a brief enumeration which will be described accordingly later
on. (4)

सर्व एव निजा विकारा नान्यथा वातिककफेभ्यो निर्वाँति, यथा हि—शकुनिः सर्व दिवसमपि परिपतन् स्वां छायां
नातिवर्तते, तथा स्वस्थातुभ्यनिर्मितः। सर्वे विकारा वातिककफाभ्यातिवर्तते। वातिपलेभ्यां पुनः स्थानसंस्थानप्रकृति-
विशेषाणिभिसमीक्ष्य वदातकनिधि य सर्वविकारांसर्वनेवोपदिशति बुद्धिमतः॥ ११॥

All the innate disorders do not arise except from vāta, pitta and kapha. As a bird,
though flying over all the day, does not transcend its shadow, all the disorders caused
by disequilibrium of innate factors do not go beyond (causation of) vāta, pitta and
kapha. The wise physicians having observed the location, characters and functions of
vāta, pitta and kapha define the disorders caused by them. [5]

भवतश्च–

स्वधातुर्द्वेषमनिर्मिजा ये विकारसंभा बहवः शरीरे।
न ते पृथक् पित्तकफानिलेभ्य आगन्तवस्तेभ्य इति विशेषाः॥ ११॥

Here are the verses–

The multiple groups of disorders in the body which are caused by the
disequilibrium of innate factors are not independent of pitta, kapha and vāta. Only
exogenous disorders are different from them. [6]

आगन्तुर्नेति निजं विकारं निजस्तसंगे प्रभवः।
तमनुबन्धं प्रकृतिं च समागृ जानता तः कर्म समारभेत॥ ११॥

Sometimes exogenous factor follows the innate disorder and the innate factor get
associated with the exogenous disorder when it is developed. There one should start
the treatment after knowing well the primary cause and the secondary factor. [7]

तत्र श्लोकौ–

त्रिशकांडकानकांडीय विकांडोकाशदयः। द्विशाखाहौ, चतुष्काश दश, ह्रदश पञ्चकाः॥ ११॥
चत्वारचाधका षष्टिः, ट्टी, शयकाञ्चः। अशोढ़चे रोगणां रोगाध्याये प्रकाशिताः॥ ११॥
