XXI]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                          149

Purgation, evacuation of head, emesis, fear, anxiety, anger, smoking, exercise,
blood-letting, fasting, uncomfortable bed, predominance of sattwa and subduing
tamas–these check the unwholesome and excessive occurence of sleep. These very
factors may be taken as causes of insomnia, alongwith (over) work, time (old age),
disorder (vātika), constitution (vātika) and aggravation of vāta itself. [55-57]

तमोभवा श्लेष्मसमुत्था च मः।शरीरश्रमभवा च ।
आगन्तुकी व्याधेयुत्तिनी च राजसिकाभवाभव्या च ।।५८।।

Sleep is (of the following types)–caused by tamas, caused by kapha, caused by
physical exertion, caused by mental exertion, adventitions, as sequelae to a disease
and normally occuring in night. [58]

रात्रिस्वभावप्रभवा सता या सॉ सुतरामों जगतीनिं तताः ।
तमोभवामाहुरसत्य मूलं शेषाः पुनःपापेषु निर्दिष्टाः ।।५९।।

The normally occuring sleep at night is that which is regarded as supporting of
creatures by the experts. That caused by tamas is known as the root of sin while the
remaining ones are observed in disease. [59]

तत्र श्लोकाः–
निन्दिताः प्रेष्ठतमेषु यौ विशेषेण निन्दिती । निन्दिते कारणं दोषास्तद्योर्निन्दितभेषजम् ।।६०।।
शेषेषु चदा हिता निद्रा येभ्यश्चाहिता हिता वदा । अतिनिद्राव्यनिद्राणां भेषजं यश्च सा ।।६१।।
या या चेयाप्रभवा च निद्रा तत्र संसंमिताः । अजानिन्दिरसंख्यात्यात्मे व्याखातः पुनर्वसुः ।।६२।।

Now, the (summing up) verses–
Despicable persons, the two particularly despicable amongst them, the cause of
despicability, defects and treatment, indications and contra-indications of sleep, the
cause and treatment of over-sleep and sleeplessness, types of sleep and their effects–
all this has been explained by Punarvasu, the son of Atri, in the chapter on the eight
despicable etc. [60-62]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने द्वाविंशतितमोऽध्यायः
नायकाश्रितातिमोगोऽध्यायः ।। २१ ।।

Thus ends the twenty first chapter on the eight despicable etc.
in Ślokasthāna in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and
redacted by Caraka. (21)
