SŪTRASTHĀNA                                                    151

Rūksaṇa (roughening) is that which produces roughness, coarseness and non-sliminess. Snehana (unction) is that which produces unction, oozing, softness and moistening. Svedana (sweating) produces sweat and alleviates stiffness, heaviness and cold. Stambhana (checking therapy) is that which checks the movement of mobile substances.

The drug possessing light, hot, sharp, non-slimy, rough, minute, coarse, unstable and hard properties has got mostly the reducing effect. The drug possessing heavy, cold, soft, unctuous, solid, gross, slimy, dull, stable and smooth properties is mostly promoting in effect. Rough, light, coarse, sharp, hot, stable, non-slimy and hard drug is mostly roughening in effect. Liquid, minute, non-stable, unctuous, slimy, heavy, cold, dull and soft drug is mostly uncting in effect. Hot, sharp, unstable, unctuous, rough, minute, liquid and stable drug is mostly sweating in effect. Cold, dull, soft, smooth, rough, minute, liquid, stable and light drug is mostly checking in effect. [9-17]

चतुष्कारः संशुद्धिः पिपासा मालतापौ । पाचनानुव्यवसाये व्यायामश्चेति लङ्घनम् ॥१८॥

Reducing therapy may be applied in various forms such as four types of evacuation, thirst, exposure to wind and the sun, digestive measures, fasting and physical exercise. [18]

प्रभूतश्लेष्माधिकस्थूलाः संशुद्धिभाजनाः । बृहच्छरीरा बलिनो लघ्वीभिः विशुद्धिभिः ॥१९॥
येषां मध्यबलाः रोगाः कफपित्तसमुत्थिताः । वमनातीसारहृद्रोगारोचकश्वासकाससत्वराः ॥२०॥
विबन्धगौरवारुचिश्वलनाधिकोपशः । पाचनैर्विपचेत्ताँश्च भिषक् प्राज्ञेणाऽऽदितमारभेत् ॥२१॥
एत एव प्रादुर्भिः येस्त्वल्पामयाः सन्ति तान्पुनः । रोगांश्चेतसमथ्यस्थान् व्यायामानलसेवयेत् ॥२२॥
रोगांश्चेतसवथ्यस्थान् व्यायामानिलसेवयेत् । बलिनि किं पुनर्येषां रोगाणामल्पं बलम् ॥२३॥
स्नेहदीपना प्रमाणि श्रुद्धिभिर्विशुद्धिभिः । शिशिरे लड्मं संशयेभि वातिकारोगिणाम् ॥२४॥

Those having big body and strength, abundant kapha, pitta, blood and excreta, and those using excess of (aggravated) vāyu should be subjected to reducing therapy by means of evacuation. Those afflicted with the diseases of moderate severity and caused by kapha and pitta like vomiting, diarrhoea, heart disease, cholera, alasaka, fever, constipation, heaviness, eructation, nausea, anorexia etc. should mostly be treated with digestives in the beginning by the learned physician. These very diseases, when with little severity, should be overcome with control of thirst and fasting. The diseases of moderate and little severity in strong persons should be treated with physical exercise and exposure to the sun and wind. The persons suffering from skin disorders, diabetes and those using excess of unctuous, channel-blocking and promoting diet and also patients of vātika disorders should be subjected to reducing therapy in śiśira (late winter). [19-24]
