152	CARAKA-SAMHITĀ	[CH

अदितचपविजाविकेचक् यद:स्थं सात्म्यसाहारिणाम् । मृगमत्स्यविहङ्गानांसांर्थ षंदशभुखते ॥२४॥
क्षीणा: क्षता: कृशा वृद्धा दुर्बला नित्यधावका: । क्षीयाचिनां शीमे च सुखशीर्षी याः प्रमाः ॥२५॥
रोचाचारितयूपदोषोपचविगिभिः परिशिष्ट ये । तेषां क्रव्यादानसांपि बृंहणा तरणवो रसाः ॥२७॥
स्नानमुसर्त्स्वद्य स्वयो मधुरः मेहयान्यन् । शक्करात्रीकस्मिश्रैः सर्वेषां सिद्धं युंहणम् ॥२८॥

Undamaged meat of salt animals, fish and birds living in suitable environments
and killed with non-poisonous weapons is (the best) promoting one. The persons
wasted, wounded, lean, old, weak, constantly travelling on foot and indulged in women
and wine and also in the summer are suitable for promoting therapy. For those suffer-
ing from consumption, piles, disorders of grahani and wasted by other (similar) dis-
eases, the light meat-soup of carnivorous animals is the best promoting one. Bath,
anointing, sleep, enema with sweet and unctuous substances, sugar, milk and ghee
are universal promoters. [25-28]

कटुतिक्तकषायाणां सेवनं श्रीपचस्येव: । छालिपिण्याकताक्राणां मध्यादीनां च रूक्षणम् ॥२९॥
अभिघातपाचपा महादोषा मध्यस्थ व्याधयो ये वा । क्रूरस्नम्भुयुरुस्थाना अङ्गानि लिखितिः ॥३०॥
संना: स्वेदितव्याछ स्वेदाः स्वेदाछ ये रत: । म्रोधाय्याने यथास्थान स्वेदाश्चं च सविस्तराः ॥३१॥

Roughening therapy consists of the regular intake of pungent, bitter and
astringent articles, sexual acts and use of oil-cakes, buttermilk and honey etc. The
roughening therapy is indicated in the diseases which are caused by blocking of
channels, strong dosas and are located in vital parts and in irustambha (stiffening of
thighs) etc. Unction, persons suitable for unction, sweating and persons suitable for
sweating have been explained earlier in detail in the concerned chapters. [29-31]

दवं तन्सारं यावच्छीतितरणवीणाम् । स्वादु तितं कषायं च सत्म्यं सर्वेव भवं ॥३२॥
पित्तशारपित्त्यन्य ये भवत्सारोपरिधा: । विस्वदेतिगोलाचा: सन्मनोव नित्तिविधिः ॥३३॥

All the drugs and measures consisting of liquid, thin, stable, cooling and having
sweet, bitter and astringent tastes constitute the checking therapy. It is indicated in
pitta, burns with alkali and fire, vomiting, diarrhoea, excessive application of poisons
and sweating. [32-33]

यालतप्रवरीणणिं नित्राग्रे गालसापरां । हृदंशोहरककण्ठशुद्धी तालाभस्मो ते ॥३४॥
म्वेदे जाते रुची श्वैव बुभुक्षापिपासेर्वं । मूलं तनुगानोदेनं निर्वाणि खानराशिनः ॥३५॥
पंपरीठी डुम्बेद काः: मोणि परुषत्व च । बुभुजांसिदर्भावज द्वारिखातिद्धं अलेखितिः ॥३६॥
मनः रभ्रमभो मुखशोषातसंखो ह्राद् । देवशिदर्वलसभ्रक संहुबेनिखिखे भयेव ॥३७॥

The roughening is properly administered when
there is proper elimination of wind, urine and faeces, lightness in body, cleansing of
heart, eructation, throat and mouth, disappearance of drowsiness and exhaustion,
appearance of sweat, relish and both hunger and thirst together, and also the feeling
of well-being. Pain in joints, body-ache, cough, dryness of mouth, loss of hunger,
