XXII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               153

anorexia, thirst, weakness of hearing and vision, confusion of mind, frequent eructa-
tions, feeling of darkness, loss of weight, digestive power and strength–these are the
symptoms of excessive reducing therapy. [34-37]

वमने पुष्टयुतलम्भः कार्यदेहिचिकित्सितम् । स्थूल्यं भुनिते स्मीयभगि चात्यर्थवृत्तिते ।।३८।।

On proper administration of promoting therapy one gets strength and corpulence
and gives up the defects of the lean. On excessive application of promotive therapy
one suffers from obesity. The symptoms of proper and excessive administration of
roughening therapy are the same as those of the reducing therapy. [38]

कृतचिकित्सितेशु यलग्नेते तज्ज्ञैः स्खलिते । स्वाभिम्नः स्थाश्ले लक्षणं यथोक्तांद्रायभूपिते ।।३९।।
ज्यवतां सकमग्रागलद्वगे ह्रुत्येकः। ह्रद्धीनिपशु स्याद्तिसर्गनिश्संखणम् ।।४०।।

The checking therapy is regarded as properly administered when the disorders
are overcome and strength is gained. On excessive application of the checking therapy
the patient is afflicted with blackishness, stiffness in body parts, uneasiness, lockjaw,
and obstruction in heart (function) and excretion of faeces. [39-40]

लक्षणं चाकृतानां स्वस्थ षण्यमेधासे समासतः । तद्योगानां षडानामेषे सम्यगूर्क्वमाणे ।।४१।।
इति षड् सर्वरोगाणां षोकाः सम्यगूर्क्वमाः । साम्यासाद् सर्वगे सिद्धा भाजाकालानुरोधिनः ।।४२।।

These six therapeutic measures should be known generally as not adequately administered
when the treated doṣas are not pacified rather are aggravated. Thus the six therapeutic
measures useful in all disorders and which are tried in treatment of the curable disor-
ders in accordance with dose and time are said. [41-42]

भवति चास–
दोषाणां बद्धसंसर्गिते सद्योधिधे चूपक्रमाः । षट्त्वं तु जातिवर्तन्ते विलयं षातादतो यश ।।४३।।

On combination of doses, the therapies also get mixed up but even
then they do not go beyond the six (numbers) like doṣas (vāta etc.) not transgressing
the three (numbers). [43]

तत स्लोकिका:–
इत्यभिनिस्तचाये व्याख्यातासे। यथाप्रश्नं भगवता चिकित्सा वैः प्रवति ।।४४।।

Now (the summing up) verses–
The six therapeutic measures have been explained, according to queries, by
the Lord (Atreya) in this chapter on the reducing etc. by which the treatment pro-
ceeds. [44]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते तन्त्रे स्लोकस्थाने लझुबृंद्विणीयो
नाम द्वाविंशेऽध्यायः ।।२२।।

Thus ends the twenty second chapter on reducing and
promoting (measures) etc. in Ślokasthāna in the
treatise composed by Agniveśa and
redacted by Caraka. (22)

25 C.S.-I
