156                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

One having regular physical exercise, taking food only after the previous meal
is digested, eating barley and wheat gives up obesity and is relieved of the disorders
caused by over-saturation. The remedy for the disorders caused by over-saturation is
undernutritional regiment. [8-25]

उक्तं संसर्पमोलाक्षणामपचर्पणमौषधम् । वक्ष्यते सीधया्छोर्ध्यमपतर्पणाद गदाः ॥२६॥
देहाग्निबलसत्त्वोजः शुक्रमानसचक्षुषाम् । ह्रासः काशानुबन्धश्च शूलं अग्निशुलनक्तम् ॥२७॥
श्रोदोर्द्विपत्यनाशः संलयो इदयव्यथा । विषमप्रसेकः शूलं अग्निशुलनक्तम् ॥२८॥
पर्विशिरःसंग्रहे च दाने याता गदाः ॥२९॥
तेषां संसर्पे तखः पुनरुक्तावतीकौषधम् । तत्कालौ सर्वे व्याध्यास्थाने या विदिष्टे ॥३०॥

The disorders caused by under-nutrition will be described alongwith their
treatment. Loss of body (weight), digestive power, strength, lustre, ojas, semen and
musculature; fever, continuous cough, pain in sides (chest), anorexia, weakness in
hearing, insanity, delirium, cardiac pain, obstruction in excretion of urine and stool,
pain in shanks, thighs and sacral region, tearing pain in nodes and joints, and other
vātika disorders like upward movement of vāyu etc. are caused by under-nutrition.
They are treated by experts with saturating measures which exhibit their effects in-
stantly or after prolonged use. [26-30]

सद्यः हीनो हि सद्यो वै तर्पणेनोचिकयेत् । नर्वे संतर्पणाभ्यासात्बिरक्षीणासं पुष्टिता ॥३१॥
देहाग्निदोषभैषजात्रकालनुर्तिना । कार्यमालरमार्गेण भैषजं विदुर्बुधैः ॥३२॥
हिता मांसरसाः सर्वी क्षीरं सर्पिश्च वा पानिच् । बस्ताः तलयो म्रध्यानोत्संतर्पणप्रयोगे ये ॥३३॥
अवरकाशसाम्बानाने कृशानों मूकुसतिबंधमान् । तृष्णामूर्च्छावकृशाः वृष्यतों वर्पण धृताः ॥३४॥
शर्कराईपिवलः मुद्गि तिलकुल्मास मक्षिकाः शर्करत्री ॥३५॥
सत्त्वयो यदित शर्कण भेती तर्पण । सिभमातादिबिवेकप्रकाशफलापुनलोभयम् ॥३६॥
फलतिति संसक्ते सर्पद्धि संविधिसत्वराः । तर्पण च विश्ये शुक्लो पुरुषर्क्षप्रभावणे बिसेषं ॥३७॥
मन्थः खर्जूरमिश्रकापुलालाःसर्पिदेवतादिभिः । त्वरके मामसैनालौ मजवान्सुनर् ॥३८॥

One afflicted with acute wasting regains normalcy by administration of immedi-
ately acting saturating measures while the other suffering from chronic wasting does
not recover except by prolonged use of such measures. In case of chronic debility, the
physician should administer the treatment unhurriedly keeping in view the body, power
of digestion, dosa, drugs, dose and time. For such patients, meat-soup, plenty of
milk, ghee, bath, enema, massage and saturating drinks are beneficial. The saturating
drinks beneficial for those suffering from fever, cough, emaciation, dysuria, thirst
and upward vāyu will now be described.

Mantha (churned drink) prepared with equal quantity of sugar, long pepper, oil,
ghee and honey alongwith double the quantity of roasted grain flour is aphrodisiac
and recommended for them.
