160                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

    When in a person indulged in dirty food and having himself covered with rajas
and tamas, the vitiated dosas, singly or in combination, obstruct the channels carrying
rakta, rasa and consciousness and are located there, they give rise to diseases-mada
(narcosis), mūrcchā (fainting) and samnyāsa (coma). [25-29]

रक्तानप्पदृताभार्ग बलस्खलितवीद्विसम् । विद्याह्यामनतिरिं क्षरप्रायान्वक्णकृतिम् ॥३०॥
सक्रोधरुण्मुखभार्ग संभ्रान्तकलिलिप्रभम् । विद्यात् पित्तमदाविषं रक्तपीतसितास्कृतिम् ॥३१॥
स्वल्पासंबद्धवचनं तन्द्रालरससंनिष्टम् । विद्यात् कफमदाविषं पाण्डु श्यामतनरम्परम् ॥३१॥

    The person should be diagnosed as a case of vātika mada, if his speech is adher-
ent, excessive and fast, movement is unstable and falling, and face is rough, reddish
or blackish. The person with angry and harsh speech, inclination towards beating and
quarrels, and red, yellow and black face should be known as a case of paittika mada.
The one afflicted with kaphaja mada has little and incoherent speech, drowsiness
and lassitude, paleness and continued concentration. In sannipātaja mada, all these
features are found. [30-32]

सर्वत्रिभागप्रानं क्षणिं सक्रियाकृते मदे । जातपं श्राम्यति धित्वं मद्ये मद्यमदकृतिः ॥३३॥

    This narcosis arises and subsides quickly like the alcoholic narcosis. [33]

मद्यं मद्यकृतः सर्वेषं पीतिरेव च । सर्व तृते नदा नष्टं चातिपितकादवम् ।।३४॥

    All types of narcosis-caused by alcoholic drinks, poisons or blood-are not except
(the vitiation of the three (dosas) vāta, pitta and kapha. [34]

नील वा पाते वा कृष्णाकाशारयाकाशलं रोगम् । परयेतान्नः प्रतिक्षतिं हृद्यिं प्र प्रतिलुष्यते ॥३५॥
वेयक्षणभूमेदं प्रेषित इत्यस्य च । काचार्यं श्रयाकाशदा छाया मुखनिय सतसंभव ॥३६॥
रक्तं हरिताभं वा विद्युत् पीताभयातिं वा । परयेतान्नः प्रतिक्षतिं विपरीतं संनिवृत्यते ॥३०॥
सचिपायाः सर्संतोपे रसपीतांकुलतेगतः । संचिप्रज्ञाः पीताभि मुखनिय विपतसंभव ॥३८॥
मेघाच्छारनाकाशास्मायतं वा तमोयुते । परयेतान्नः प्रतिक्षतिं विपरीतं विचेतसः ॥३९॥
गुरुणिः शचवृतेर्जितवीद्धिणं पर्याणम् । सरसेक्षः सक्षुनासो मुखनिय कफसंभव ॥४०॥
समर्वकृतिः शतिप्रवानरुत्पन्ना इगानाः । य अनु पात्या यासु विद्या तिभाचसतेभितिः ॥४१॥

    In vātika mūrcchā, the patient becomes unconscious seeing the sky as blue, black or
reddish and recovers quickly. Other symptoms are trembling, body-ache, excessive pain in
cardiac region, emaciation, blackish and reddish lustre. In paittika mūrcchā, unconsciousness
comes after seeing the sky as red, green or yellow and recovery is with sweating. There are
also symptoms like thirst, pyrexia, red or yellow disturbed eyes, loose motions and
yellow face. The patient of kaphaja mūrcchā, gets inconscious after seeing the sky like
clouds or covered with deep darkness and recovers after a long time. He feels his body
parts heavy and as wrapped with wet hide. He also suffers from excessive salivation
and nausea. Sannipātaja mūrcchā has got the characters of all the above types
