पञ्चविंशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XXV

अथातो यज्ञः पुरुषोत्पत्तयश्चायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥
Now (I) shall expound the chapter on the origin of person etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह मगधानाम्। ॥२॥
As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

पुरा प्रत्यक्षमयोषां भगवतां पुनर्वसुम् । सकलाना महर्षीणां सादुरासीदिम कथा ॥३॥
आत्मेन्द्रियमनोयोनिं योऽर्थं पुरुषमुत्मज्ञः । रोगिरत्यामणां च प्राग्रूपविनिर्णयेः ॥४॥
Once a discussion started in the assembly of great sages in presence of Lord Punarvasu, who visualised the virtue, as to decide the early origin of person, who is an aggregate of the self, sense organs, mind and objects and the diseases pertaining to him. [3-4]

तदनुरं काशिराजतिर्मकु वाक्यमप्रक्षिद् । व्याजहारसर्वसंनिहितपुरुषत्यामिभवाद्य च ॥५॥
किंतु भोः पुरुषो मज्जलाज्ञलत्यामापः स्मृताः । न च वेत्सुको नरेन्द्रो प्रोवाचभिन् पुनर्वसुम् ॥६॥
सर्व एवामिनहानविज्ञानवत्किंत्रिसंशयाः। स भवानशेषमुदेति काशिराजस्य संशयम् ॥७॥
Initiating the discussion, Vāmaka, the king of Kāśī and a learned scholar, came forward before the sages' assembly and respectfully inquired as to whether the source of origin of person is also the source of that of the diseases pertaining to him. Thereafter, Lord Punarvasu addressed the sages–You are all free from doubts through unlimited knowledge and understanding and as such are capable of removing the doubts of the king of Kāśi. [5-7]

पारिक्षितातरीक्ष्यो मौद्गल्यो वाक्यमप्रक्षित् । आत्मपः पुरुषो रोमांढापनाः कारणं हि सः ॥८॥
स चितोऽनुभूच्य च कर्म कर्मफलानि च । न बुद्धौ चेतनाताहेतो प्रजिहि सुखदुःखभैः ॥९॥
Pāriksi, a member of the Maudgalya clan, having thought over it, first of all said–Person is the product of Ātman (the Self) and so are the diseases because he is the cause. He deposits the actions and also experiences their consequences, hence without the supporting self, there can not be advent of pleasure and pain. [8-9]

शरलोमा तु नेवाह न ब्लोभाऽऽमनालत्वन् । योजनेन्द्रश्यामिद्रेशुरि; ऊँढे; खड्खी कठापन ॥१०॥
रजस्तमोभ्यां तु मनः परिलक्षणात्कम् । तसरीरस्य समुत्पत्ति विकाराणां च कारणम् ॥११॥
वायिभिन्दनु नेवाह न हेतुः कारणं यम् । तत्र शरीरस्थकारिरोगो न मनसः रिथितिः ॥१२॥
रत्नजि तु भूतानि व्यापमक व्यापिहेतुः। स्मृता निर्विधिहेताः ॥१३॥
(On this) Śaralomā said–'No, (this is not so) because the Self, having aversion to pain, would never like to inflict himself with painful situations and diseases. Hence (in my view), the mind, predominant in rajas and tamas and known as Sattva, is the cause of (origin of) the (person's) body and diseases.
