164                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Vāryovida contradicted it and said–'No, the mind alone cannot be the cause
because without body there cannot be the bodily disorders and not even the existence
of mind. Hence (in my view), the living being are the products of rasa and so are the
various disorders because ap is endowed with rasa and is known as the cause of
manifestation. [10-13]

हिरण्याक्षेतु नेत्याह न ह्यात्मा रसजः स्मृतः। नाधीतियं मनः सनि रोगाः श्राब्दादिजास्तथा ।।१४।।
षड्धात्वजस्तु पुरुषो रोगाः षड्धात्वजास्तथा। राशिः षड्धात्वजो ह्येष षाड्विरिकिः प्रकीर्तितः ।।१५।।

(On this) Hiranyākṣa said–'No, Ātman can not be the product of rasa and so also
the mind which is out of the reach of sense organs and diseases which are caused by
sound etc. (Hence in my view), person has originated from (the aggregate of) six
dhātus and so are the diseases. The person has been said as the aggregate of six dhātus
by the foremost (sages of the) Sāṅkhya order. [14-15]

तथा ब्रुवाणं कुशिकश्चाह नतीति कौशिकः। कर्मनामातिविद्यमां हि त्रिषु षड्धात्वजो भवेत् ।।१६।।
पुरुषः पुरुषादर्यीरुसाद्यः प्रजायते। त्रिषा मैत्रदयञ्चोगे रोगलाशञ्च कारणम् ।।१७।।

After listening to Kuśika (Hiranyāksas), Kauśika said–'It is not so because how
from the aggregate of six dhātus (person) can be born without the parents. Moreover,
it is observed that man, cow and horse are born of man, cow and horse respectively.
The diseases like diabetes etc. are transmitted through parents. Hence (in my view),
the parents are the cause (in origin of person and the diseases). [16-17]

षड्धात्वजस्तु नेत्याह नहन्धो-न्धात् जायते। मातापितोरपि च ते मध्रापुत्राषि पुत्रेभ्यो ।।१८।।
कर्मजस्तु मतो जन्तुः कर्मजास्तस्य व्याधयः। न च हेते कर्मणि जन्म रोगाणां पुंसश्च या ।।१९।।

Bhadrakāpya contradicted this and said–'No, (this is not so) because the blind
father does not produce a blind son. Secondly, how could the parents them-selves be
born if your view is accepted. Hence (in my view), person is the product of Karman
(past action) and so are his diseases. There is no origin of the person and his diseases
without past action. [18-19]

भरद्वाजस्तु नेत्याह कर्ता पूर्वं हि कर्मणः। दृष्टं न शाक्यते कार्यं मत्स्यं स्याते पुरुषः फलम् ।।२०।।
भारवैद्युः त्वयाभत्तो व्याधीतो पुरुषस्य च। खरदवल्योत्पत्तास्तु तेजोसानां यसैव हि ।।२१।।

(On this) Bharadvāja said–'No, (this is not so) because the doer always precedes
the action. Such so called undone action is not seen of which result person may
be. (Hence in my view) Svabhāva (Nature), is the cause of the manifestation of the
person as well as diseases as it endows the (bhūtas) ending with tejas (pṛthivī, ap,
vāyu, tejas) with the properties of roughness, liquidity, mobility and hotness respec-
tively. [20-21]

काढ्रायनस्तु नेत्याह न झाररमफलं भवेत्। भवेद् स्वभावादाद्यानामसिद्धिः सिद्धिरेव वा ।।२२।।
सह लन्मितसत्कुभ्यो भाजात्वत्र प्रजापतिः। न चेनार्वोतसत्कुभ्यो भजस्तु:खयौ: ।।२३।।
