166                         CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                        [CH

एवंवादिते भगवानात्रेयेभाषितेऽग्निवेश उवाच—कथमिह भगवन्! हिताहितानामाहाराणां लक्ष्मणनन्यत्वदर्शितानीनाम्;
हिताहाराणां च भगवता प्रोक्तस्य मात्राकालक्रियाभूमिदेहदोषदुष्टानां च भेदेन विपरीतकारित्वमुपलभ्यत
इति ॥३२॥

After Lord Ātreya finished his talk, Agniveśa put the query—'How, Sir, can we
know the exception-less definition of the wholesome and the unwholesome for arti-
cles? because we observe the opposite effects of the wholesome and the unwholesome
food articles due to variations in dose, time, preparation, place, body (constitution),
pathology and condition of the person. [32]

तमुवाच भगवानात्रेयः।—यदाहाराणामविकृतवलं। सामान्येन शरीरधातून् सृष्टी साम्यावहं विषमांश्च साम्यकरोतीत्येतद्विद्धि
विद्धि, विपरीतं स्वविपरीतम्; व्यपदेशमात्रैतत्समान्यपदवाच्यं भवति ॥३३॥

Lord Ātreya replied–'The food, which maintains the balanced dhātus in normalcy
and restores the equilibrium in mal-balanced ones, should be taken as wholesome
otherwise unwholesome. This definition of wholesome and unwholesome is without
any exception. [33]

एवंवादिति च भगवनात्रेयेनोप्रोक्त उवाच—भगवन्। न खलेवेदमुपदिष्टं भूचिरंकल्पाः; सर्वभिषजो विशा-
रदनि ॥३४॥

When Lord Ātreya said so Agniveśa added–Sir, but the instruction (imparted) in
this way would not be understood by the majority of the physicians. [34]

तमुवाच भगवानात्रेयः।—येनि हि चिकित्समाहाराणां गुणास्त उक्ताः कर्मेंच; सर्वकारणदश्नः साब्दादो भाषाः;
स खलेवेदमुपदिष्टं विशारदमत्सगे। यया तु खल्वेवेदमुपदिष्टं भूचिरंकल्पाः; सर्वभिषजो विशाराणि; तदेवेदमुपदेशपमानो
भाषाने भगवानात्रेयसन्नि; तेनि हि बहुनाम्विकभावपं भवति। आहारविधिवेशेषणैतु खलु मात्राभालकार्यवाद्धनु-
व्याख्यास्यामः ॥३५॥

Lord Ātreya replied–'Agniveśa! those, to whom the dietetics is known in terms
of property, substance, effect and the factors like quantity etc. in entirety, are able
to understand the above instruction. As regards the way in which the majority of
the physicians would grasp this instruction, I will explain this in the same way by
illustrating the factors like quantity etc. because they have got multiple variations.
The factors in relation to diet will be explained further by way of definition and indi-
vidual items. [35]

तदया—आहारत्वमाहारस्यकोऽयमाधारविशेषाः; स पुनर्द्विधितिः; स्थावरञ्चमालकालाः; द्विविध प्रभावः;
हिताहितोर्कविश्योगाः; चतुर्विश्योगाः; पानाभ्योजनविश्योगाः; यथावाखाः, समचेतः; यद्विशयालाः; विशेशगुणाः;
गुष्मपुष्टितोयमोत्तमकद्मान्दीनिश्यरसप्रयोक्तिविशेषविधिपरिभाषणखण्डमुलसप्तसुत्रमाख्यास्थानप्रमाणपाः; अपरिसंख्येय-
विकल्पः; प्रत्यक्षविशेषकारणावलुभाः ॥३६॥

Such as–diet is one from the point of view of intake. It is of two types accord-
ing to source–immobile (plant kingdom) and mobile (animal kingdom); also of
two types according to effect–wholesome and unwholesome. It is of four types
