174                          CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                          [CH

prepared of cereals) surā, sauvīra, tuṣodaka, maireya, medaka and dhānyāmla. Twenty
six phalāsavas (āsavas prepared of fruits) from (the fruits of) grapes, dates, gambhārī,
dhanwana, rājādana, ketakī, paruṣaka, harītakī, āmalaka, mṛgāliṇḍika, jambu,
kapittha, kuvala, badara, karkandhu, pīlu, priyāla, panasa, nyagrodha, aśwatha,
plakṣa, pārīṣa, udumbara, ajamoda, śṛṅgāṭaka and śankhiṇī. Mūlāsavas (āsavas
prepared from roots) are eleven such as prepared from (the roots of) śālaparṇī,
aśwagandhā, śobhānjana, śatāvarī, śyāmā, trivṛt, dantī, dravanī, bilwa, eraṇḍa and
citraka. Sārāsavas (āsavas prepared from the heartwood) are twenty such as prepared
from (the heartwood of) śāla, priyaka (nīpa), aśwkarna, candana, syandana, khadira,
kadara, saptaparṇa, arjuna, asana, arimeda, tinduka, kinihi, śamī, badarī, śiṃśapā,
śiriṣa, vañjula, dhanwana and madhūka. Puṣpāsavas (āsavas prepared from flowers)
are ten such as those prepared from (the flowers of) padma, utpala, nalina, kumuda,
saugandhika, puṇḍarīka, śatapatra, madhūka, priyaṅgu and dhātakī. Kāṇḍasavas
(āsavas prepared from stems) such as those prepared from ikṣu (sugarcane), kāṇḍekṣa,
ikṣubālikā and puṇḍraka. Patrāsavas (āsavas prepared from leaf) are two such as
those prepared from (the leaves of) paṭola and tālaka. Twagāsavas (āsavas prepared
from bark of) tilwaka, lodhra, clavāluka and kramuka. Śarkarāsava (āsava prepared
from sugar) is only one. Thus the number eighty four of the āsavas is according to
the single substances used in their preparation. They are known as 'āsava' because of
their nature 'āsuta' (being fermented). These have various types of drugs, their
conjunction and disjunction and also the methods of preparation. They exhibit their
effect on the basis of their respective composition and method of preparation. In
order to have those effects, the factors like combination, method of preparation, place,
time, quantity etc. in relation to those āsavas, are decided. [49]

भवति चात्र–
मनःशरीराग्निप्रसादायमस्वप्नोत्काश्चिचिताशनानाम् ।
संवर्धनानि श्वयसासनार्तितिलकं तत्त्वलरिष्ठ ।।५०।।

Here is (the verse)–
The eighty four prominent āsavas have been said here which promote strength
of mind, body and digestion; alleviate sleeplessness, anxiety and anorexia and are
exhilarating. [50]

तत्र श्लोकः–
शरीरोगजरती मलिन तत्सेन बाहारिदिक्षयं च ।
उवाच यत्रःपुरुषार्थकेऽस्मिन् मुनिरेयात्रप्रणिर् वरसंशोभ ।।५१।।

Now (the summing up) verse–
