XXVII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               177

substratum of rasas dependent on natural composition, products, preparation, place
and time; heavy, light, cold, hot, unctuous, rough etc. are the properties residing in
those substrata known as dravya (substance or drug). 'Kṣāra' is so called because of
'kṣaraṇa' (having been poured out). It is not a rasa but a dravya (substance) having
been derived from many substances, having many rasas predominantly pungent and
saline, with many sense objects and produced by a particular method of preparation.
Unmanifestedness is there in primordial source of rasa, anurasa (secondary rasa) and
in the substance having anurasa. Innumerableness (of rasas) due to that of the factors
like substratum etc. is not justified because even a single (rass) is attached to innu-
merable factors like substratum etc. still it does not forego its identity. Even in case
of the combination of rasas, there is no innumerableness of its primordial source,
natural properties and actions that is why the intelligent ones do not describe the
action of the combined rasas. Based on this fact, (I) will describe the characters of
uncombined six rasas separately. [9]

अते तु लावदृव्यभेदपरिचयाय किञ्चिदभिधास्यामः । सद् द्रव्यं पञ्चभौतिकामिसर्गतं; तत्त्वेतना चतुर्वेगनं च,
तस्य गुणः शब्दादयो गुरुलघ्वाद प्रवानाः; कर्म पञ्चविधमुक्तं वमनाद्यं ॥ १०॥

First of all (I) will tell something about the details on drugs. In this context,
drugs is constituted of five bhūtas–pṛthivī, ap, tejas, vāyu and ākāśa. It is (of two
types) sentient and insentient. Its properties are sound etc. and those from guru to
drava, and its action has been said as five-fold– vamana etc. [10]

तत्र द्रव्याणि गुरुलघुशीतोष्णस्निग्धरूक्षाणां लक्षणमनुव्याख्यास्यामः पार्थिवानि, लघुरूपरसस्वभवानींत्वदेहविकारकाणि;
रक्षिलत्वगत्लहदृदुत्वाद्यगुणसम्भवानिपृथ्वीप्रधानशीलात्पूर्वगुणानि, तानि रौद्रप्रासादिकारकाणि शाखावचकाणि;
लघुशीलानि प्रारप्यागुणसम्भवानि विद्धध्यायगुणसम्भवानि भूमिलघुप्रासादातसत्त्वाकाशप्रधानानि, तानि
यार्थिलेप-लालास्वेदकराणि ॥ ११॥

Dravyas (drugs) which are predominant in properties of heavy, coarse, hard,
dull, stable, non-slimy, solid, gross and smell are pārthiva (constituted predominantly
by pṛthivī bhūta). They exert actions like development, compactness, heaviness
and firmness.

Those predominant in properties of liquid, unctuous, cold, dull, soft, slimy and
taste are āpya (constituted predominantly by ap bhūta). They exert actions like mois-
tening, unction, binding, oozing, softening and exhilaration.

Dravyas predominant in properties of hot, sharp, minute, light, rough, non-slimy
and vision are āgneya (constituted predominantly by agni (tejas) bhūta). They pro-
duce heat, digestion, lustre, light and complexion.

28 C.S.-I
