184                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

abundance of vāyu and agni, it produces vātika disorders in feet, hands, sides, back
etc. particularly with symptoms like movements, burning pain, tremors, piercing and
tearing pains. (4)

Tikta rasa, though itself non-relishing destroys disrelish, is antipoison,
anthelmintic, alleviates fainting, burning sensation, itching, leprosy (including skin
disorders) and thirst; provides firmness to skin and muscles, is antipyretic, appetiser,
digestive, galacto-depurant, reducing, absorbent of moisture, fat, muscle-fat, marrow,
lymph, pus, sweat, urine, faeces, pitta and kapha; and is rough, cold and light. This,
though possessing so many qualities, if used singly and excessively, on account of
its roughness, coarseness and non-sliminess, dries up rasa, rakta, māṃsa, medas,
asthi, majjā and śukra; causes coarseness in channels, takes away strength, produces
emaciation, malaise, mental confusion, giddiness, dryness of mouth and other vātika
disorders. (5)

Kaṣāya rasa is pacifying, astringent, union-promoting, compressing, healing,
absorbing, checking (discharges); pacifies kapha, rakta and pitta; utilises the
body fluid, is rough, cold and slightly light. This, though possessing so many
qualities, if used singly and excessively, dies up mouth, causes heart-ache, flatu-
lence, hindrance in voice, slowing of movement in channels, blackishness, impotency,
gas formation during digestion; checks flatus, urine, faeces and semen; produces
emaciation, malaise, thirst, stiffness; and, because of its coarseness, non-sliminess
and roughness, causes vātika disorders like hemiplegia, spasm, convulsions, facial
paralysis etc. [43]

इत्येवमेते षड्रसाः एकत्वेनैकः नेन षा भवतः सम्यगुपयुज्यमाना उपकारिण्य भवन्त्यत्यात्यलोकस्य, अपकारकाः
पुनरतोऽधिका भवन्त्युपयुज्यमानाः; तदि विद्वानुपकारार्थिव भावाः सम्यगुपयोजयेदिति ।।४४।।

These six rases, when used in proper quantity, are beneficial for the living be-
ings, otherwise they b come harmful. Hence the wise should use these properly in proper
quantity in orde to derive benefit (from them). [44]

भवति चात—
शीतो वीर्येण मधुरो मधुरः रसापको: । तथोरलः मधुरो यः स यदुस्वं कटुकं तयोः ।।४५।।

Here are (the verses):

The substance (drug or diet) which is madhura in rasa and vipāka
(biotransformation) is śīta (cold) in vīrya (potency). Likewise, the substance, amla in
rasa and vipāka, or kaṭuka in vipāka, is uṣṇa (hot) in vīrya. [45]

तेषां रसोपदेशेऽस्मे गुणसंख्या । श्रीतोऽतिविरतीनां पाकजब्धोपदेशसी ।।४६।।
यश्च यथो यया सर्पिर्वा वा धव्यविज्ञकी । एकमाहिणि चाम्यति निर्दिशेत्तलो विभक्तः ।।४७।।
