186                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                         [CH

पर चातो विपाकानां लक्षणं संप्रवक्ष्ये ॥५७॥
कटुतिक्तकषायाणां विपाकः प्रायः कटुः । अम्लोऽस्लं पचते स्वादुर्मधुरं लवणास्नता ॥५८॥

Hereafter, vipāka will be described. (Substances having) katu, tikta and kaṣāya
rasas have often katu vipāka, amla is transformed into amla (vipāka) and madhura
and lavana have madhura vipāka. [57-58]

मधुरी लवणायली च निनयभावालस्थ रसाः । वातमूत्रपुरीषाणां प्रायो मोढे सुखा नताः ॥५९॥
कटुतिक्तकषायाण दु:खभावालस्थ रसाः । दु:खाय मोढे मूत्रस्ये वातविण्मूत्रसंग्रहे ॥६०॥

Madhura, lavana and amla– these three rasas, due to unctuousness, are often
conducive to elimination of wind, urine and faeces. On the contrary, katu, tikta and
kaṣāya–these three rasas, due to roughness, create hindrance in elimination of wind,
faeces, urine and semen. [59-60]

शुक्रतां वातविमूत्रस्थ विपाकतो जायते कटुः । मधुरः कफशुक्राणां विपाकः कफवर्धनः ॥६१॥
विषकृत् सुखविमूत्रस्थः कफशुक्रमः गुरुकन्मधुरः । तयोर् मृदुः स्याल्लघुपाकः सुखकालस्त्वन्ता ॥६२॥

Katu vipāka damages semen, obstructs (elimination of) faeces and urine and
aggravates vāta. Madhura vipāka helps elimination of faeces and urine and increases
kapha and semen. Amla vipāka aggravates pitta, helps elimination of faeces and
urine and damages semen. Amongst them, madhura vipāka is guru (heavy) and the
other two (katu and amla) vipākas are laghu (light). [61-62]

विपाकलक्षणगतास्थत्वभूमिभेदाने अपि । इन्धणां गुणभेदेष्वग्नेस्था संभोजयतेस्ये ॥६३॥

According to variations in gunas (properties) there is also variation in degrees
(lowest, medium and highest) of vipāka. [63]

मृदुतीक्ष्णगुरुलघुस्निग्धरूक्षोष्णशीतास्तु । चतीरकतिसि केचित् केचित्वितिनिर्मिनाताः ॥६४॥
शीतोष्णमिति, तयोर् तु क्रियते देव या क्रिया । नाचीर्ये मुलके किंचित् तस्य रमसां वीर्यं भविता ॥६५॥

Some hold that there is eight-fold vīrya–mṛdu (soft), tīkṣṇa (sharp), guru (heavy),
laghu (light), snigdha (unctuous), rūkṣa (rough), uṣṇa (hot) and śīta (cold) while
some opine that there are only two vīryas–śīta (cold) and uṣṇa (hot). In fact, vīrya
(potency) is that which is responsible for each and every action. The substance can
exert no action in absence of vīrya and as such (it is concluded that) all actions are
exerted due to vīrya. [64-65]

रसो निपातं इन्धणाने, विपाकः कर्मनिष्ठम् । चीर्य शारदयीसासीपतासांपिपातावलभ्यते ॥६६॥

Rasa is known by its contact with the body (particularly tongue). Vipāka is known
by (observing) the final effect (on body) and vīrya is known (by the action exerted)
during the period from administration till excretion (of the drug). [66]

रसवीर्यविपाकानां साम्यान्यं यत् लक्ष्यते । विशेषः कर्मणि चैव प्रभावात् स मुखः ॥६७॥

In cases, where, inspite of similarity in rasa, vīrya and vipāka, there is difference
in action, this (difference) is said to be due to prabhāva (specific potency). [67]
