XXVI]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                191

tion, cooking, combination, palatability, richness (in properties), rules of eating, is
not wholesome (for the person). If in arid zone rough and sharp substances, and in
marshy region unctuous and cold ones are used, it is known as antagonistic in respect
of place. Likewise, if one takes rough and cold etc. in the winter and pungent, hot etc.
in the summer, it is antagonistic in terms of time. Similar is the antagonism of food
and drinks in four types of agni. Honey and ghee taken together in equal quantity is
antagonistic in dose. The use of sweet, cold etc. by a person accustomed to pungent,
hot etc. is antagonism in suitability. Use of diet, drug and behaviour similar to dosas
in properties but adverse to the person's practice is antagonistic to dosas. When the
edible becomes poisonous by particular processing such as in case of peacock's meat
attached to the castor stick, it is known as antagonism in processing. Antagonism in
potency is that when śītavīrya and uṣṇavīrya substances combined together are taken.
Antagonism in bowels is that when too little, of mild potency and non-breaking drug
is administered in (persons having) hard bowels; while heavy, breaking and abundant
one is administered in (those) having soft bowel. When vāta-vitiating substance
is given to the person indulged in overwork, sexual intercourse and exercise and kapha-
vitiating one in that indulged in oversleep and laziness it is antagonism in respect
of health condition. Antagonism in order is that where one takes food before excret-
ing faeces and urine and without appetite or excessive hunger. If hot things are
taken after intake of pork etc. or cold ones after intake of ghee etc. it is known as
antagonism in indication and contra-indication. Antagonism in cooking consists
of cooking on damaged or bad fuel or if the grains are uncooked, over-cooked or
burnt. Sour things taken with milk is antagonism in combination. Antagonism in pal-
atability is taking of unlike things. Antagonism in richness (of qualities) is that if
there is immature, overmature or damaged rasa in a substance. It is antagonism in
rules if the food is not taken in privacy. Food taken in the above way is known as
antagonistic. [86-101]

षाड्जाल्यावधीसद्भेकोद्वर्णा विरेकतैकोऽनाङ्गमग्नरागम् ।
मूकजीवादाम्नानगशखागणों पावसूनामचब्याम्रविषेण बैधं ।।१०२।।
किलासाकुटुकब्याधिगानां शोथाग्धिरित्वत्यसीसाम् ।
सताचतत्वेप वुत्पत्तिद्वच्यं प्रवदित हेतुः ।।१०३।।

Antagonistic food is the cause of impotency, blindness, erysipelas, ascites, pus-
tules, insanity, fistula-in-ano, fainting, narcosis, tympanitis, spasm in throat, anae-
mia, āma visa, leucoderma, leprosy, grahaṇīroga, oedema, acid gastritis, fever, rhinitis,
genetic disorders and even death. [102-103]

एवं खल्वग्रेण च वैरिथिचित्तितानि व्याधिनांमिग भावाः प्रतिकारा भवति । तथा-वचन विरेचनं च,
तद्विरोधिनां च इव्याणां संख्र उनार्थमुपयोगः; तथाविधे छले; पूर्वमिभसंस्कारः शरीरस्येति ।।१०४।।
