194                                CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                               [CH

शूकधान्यसमीधान्यमांसशाकफलाब्वपान् । सर्पांस् हरितपाद्यमद्यगोरसेक्षुविकारिकान् ।।६।।
दश ही क्षपणं वर्णं कृतान्नाहारयोगिनान् । रसवीर्यविपाकैश्च प्रभावैश्च प्रब्रवीमि ।।७।।

Hereafter (I) will describe the food substances according to groups such as
śūkadhānya (awned grains), sāmidhānya (legumes), māṃsa (meat), śāka (vegetables)
phala (fruit), harita (salads), madya (alcoholic drinks), jala (water), gorasa (milk and
its products), ikṣu (sugarcane and its products), kṛtānna (dietary preparations) and
āhārayogī (condiments), in terms of rasa, vīrya, vipāka and prabhāvā. [5-7]

अथ शूकधान्यवर्गः-
रक्तशालिर्महाशालिः कलमः शकुनाहृतः । तूर्णको दीर्घशूकश्च गौरः पाण्डुकलांगुलः ।।८।।
सुगन्धकश्च लोहवालः सारिवकः प्रमोदकः । पतंगस्तापनीयश्च ये चान्ये शालयः शुभाः ।।९।।
शीता रते विपाके च मधुरास्तनुवातकाः । बवधाप्रवर्धनैर्निम्ना शालयः शूकधान्यतः ।।१०।।
रक्तशालिर्वरेसर्वेषां गुण्यात्याधिकमध्युतः । महाशालिस्ततः कलमम् तस्मात्परेऽन्ये गुणाःण्युतः ।।११।।
यवका हायना पांशुसावापया नैषधकाश्च ये । शालीनां यो गुणश्चादेयनैषधकाश्च ये ।।१२।।

Group of Śūkadhānya (awned grains).

Various good types of śāli rice such as rakta śāli, mahāśāli, kalama, śakunāhṛta,
tūrnaka, dīrghaśūka, paṇḍuka, lāṅgūla, sugandhaka, lohavāla, sāriva, pramoda, patanga,
tapanīya etc. are cold, madhura in rasa and vipāka, with little vāta, producing formed
and a little faeces, unctuous, bulk-promoting, semen-promoting and diuretic. Among
them, the red śāli is the best one, it alleviates thirst and all the three doṣas. After that
is mahāśāli and thereafter comes kalama and then other varieties.

Yavaka, hāyana, pāṃsuvāpya, naiṣadhaka etc. are the inferior varieties of śāli
which imitate (good varieties of) śāli rice in merits and demerits. [8-12]

शैतः निरम्यो गुरुः स्वादुतिक्तोऽभयः सिततरास्सङ्गः । मधिकः वरवो गौरः कृष्णगौरस्ततोऽनुगः ।।१३।।
वरकोद्दालको चीनः शारदोऽज्जवलः। गंव्यः कुडविकाश्च पंचिकापालाता गुणैः ।।१४।।
महुरक्तास्माकश्व अर्थिः सिंठंगः महुपुरुषीभिनां विद्वेषलेन पाटलाः ।।१५।।

Ṣaṣṭika (rice) is cold, unctuous, non-heavy, sweet, promotes stability and alleviates three doṣas. (Among the varieties of ṣaṣṭika), gaura (white) is the best one and
kṛṣṇagaura (blackish white) comes after that. Varaka, uddālaka, cīna, śārada, ujjvala,
dardura, gāndhāra, kuruvinda are slightly inferior to ṣaṣṭika in properties.

Vrīhi is sweet and guru but has amla pāka and as such aggravates pitta. The
pāṭala variety causes abundance of urine, faeces and heat and aggravates three
doṣas. [13-15]
