202                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Group of vegetables:

    The vegetables of pāṭhā, kāsamarda, śatī, vāstuka, suniṣaṇṇaka alleviate three
doṣas and are constipating except vāstuka which is laxative.

    Kākamācī alleviates three doṣas, is aphrodisiac, rasāyana, not too hot or too cold,
purgative and anti-leprotic.

    Rājakṣavaka alleviates three doṣas, is light, constipating and beneficial particu-
larly for those suffering from grahaṇīdoṣa and piles.

    Kālāsāka is pungent, appetiser, alleviates poison and swelling, is light, hot, vāta-
aggravating and rough.

    (Āmla) cāṅgerī is appetiser, uṣṇavīrya, constipating, useful in kapha and vāta,
and beneficial in grahaṇī and piles.

    Upoḍikā is madhura rasa, madhura vipāka, purgative, kapha-aggravating, aphro-
disiac, unctuous, cold and anti-narcosis.

    Taṇḍulīya is rough, anti-narcosis, anti-poison, beneficial in internal haemorrhage,
madhura rasa, madhura vipāka and cold.

    Maṇḍūkaparṇī, tip of vetra, kucelā, vaṇatiktaka, karkoṭaka, bākucī, paṭola,
śakulādanī, flowers of vāsā, śāṛṅgeṣṭā, kembuka, kaṭhillaka, nādī, kālāya, gojihvā,
vārtāka, tilaparṇikā, kulaka, karkaśa, nimba and parpaṭa–These are the bitter vege-
tables. They alleviate kapha and pitta and are śītavīrya and kaṭuvipāka. [88-89]

    All legumes, phāṇjī, cilī, kutumbaka, all (types of) āluka with leaves, kuṭhiñjara,
flowers of śana and śālmalī, karbudāra, suvarcalā, niṣpāva, kovidāra, pattura,
cuccuparṇikā, kumārajīva, loṭṭaka, pālaṅkyā, māriṣa, kalamba, nālikā, āsurī, kusumbha,
vṛkadhūmaka, lakṣmaṇā, cakramarda, nālinīkā, kuṭheraka, lonikā, yavāśāka,
kūṣmāṇdaka, bākucī, yātuka, śālakalyāṇī, triparṇī, pīluparṇikā,–these vegetables are
heavy, rough and often digest with distension. They are madhura, śīta vīrya and pur-
gative. They should be boiled, the juice be expressed out and then added with some
fat before intake.

    The flowers of śana, kovidāra, karbudāra and śālmalī are checking and are useful
particularly in internal haemorrhage.

    The tender young leaves of vaṭa, undumbara, aśvattha, plakṣa, lotus etc. are as-
tringent, checking, cold and beneficial in pittaja diarrhoea.

    Vatsādanī alleviates vāyu; gaṇḍīra, and citraka alleviate kapha; śreyasī, Bilwaparṇī
and bilwa (leaves) alleviate vāta.

    Bhaṇḍī, sātāvarī, balā, jīvantī, parvaṇī, parvapuṣpī–these alleviate vāta and pitta.

    The vegetable of lāṅgalikā and eraṇḍa are light, purgative and bitter.
