210                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Pakvarasa is relishing, appetiser, cordial, beneficial is phthisis, swelling and piles, alleviates disorders of fat and kapha and improves complexion.

Śītarasika is digestive, alleviates constipation, cleanses voice and complexion, is emacinting and beneficial in swelling, abdominal disorders and piles.

Gauḍa eliminates faeces and flatus, and is saturating and appetiser.

Ākṣikī is useful in anemia and wounds, and is appetiser.

Surāsava is strongly intoxicating, alleviates vāta and is palatable.

Madhvāsava is expectorant and sharp.

Maireya is sweet and heavy.

The āsava of mṛdvīkā (grapes) and ikṣu rasa (sugarcane juice) combined and fermented with dhātakī flowers is cordial, rough, relishing, appetiser, similar to mādhvīka, but not very hot.

Madhu is relishing, appetiser, cordial, tonic, non-antagonistic to pitta, alleviates constipation and kapha, is light and has little vāta.

The surā alongwith maṇḍa (upper clear portion) prepared of barley is rough, hot and aggravates vāta and pitta.

Mādhūlikā is heavy, digests with distension and aggravates kapha.

Sauviraka and tuṣodaka are appetisers, digestive, alleviate disorders of heart, anaemia, and helminthiasis, are beneficial in grahaṇī and piles and are mass-breaking.

Sour vinegar alleviates burning sensation and fever by external application and vāta and kapha by internal administration. It relieves constipation, propels (excrement) downwards and is appetiser.

The fresh wine is mostly heavy and aggravates doṣas while the old one cleanses channels, is appetiser, light and relishing.

Wine is exhilarating, nourishing, removes fear, grief and fatigue, provides boldness, energy, imagination, satisfaction, corpulence and strength. It is like nectar if used by persons predominant in sattva according to rules and with reasoning.

Thus the seventh group relating to fermented li uors is described. [178-195]

अब जलवर्गः—
जलमेकविधं सर्वं पाताद्वर्षं नभस्तलात् । तद् पात् पतित चैित चैव देशकालावपेक्षते ।।१९६।।

Group of various types of water :

Entire water is only one which falls down as rain from the sky. That while falling or having fallen down depend on place and time. [196]

खातु पतत् सोमवायाभिः स्पृष्टं कालाञ्जुवातिभिः । शीतोष्णनिग्रहक्षाश्चर्षासर्षं महीगुणे: ।।१९७।।
