216                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

नानाद्रव्याग्लास्मकाच्च योगवाहि परं मधु । इतीलुविकृतिप्रायो वर्गोऽयं दशमो मतः ॥१२४९॥

Honey is the best potentiating agent because of its derivation from various substances.

Thus the tenth group containing mostly the sugarcane products is described. [249]
अथ कृतान्नवर्गः—

क्षुद्भृत्प्यास्ग्लानिदौर्बल्यविहिरोगनाशनः । स्वेदाहिजननी पेया मातावर्धनुलोमिनी ॥१२५०॥
तर्पणी चाहिरुणी लघ्वी ग्राहिं विलेपिका । मण्डस्तु इीपनो ग्राही लघुः स्नेहप्रसादनः ॥१२५१॥
मृदुकृत्स्रोतसी पथ्यः स्वेद् विष्किरवः जतूनं वीरिकारणां जीर्णे स्नेहे च तृष्णाघ्नः ॥१२५२॥
लीमांसध्याल्यपगमः पथ्यः श्याणप्रयाणतः । लाजयपेया क्षमश्नि तु क्लामवकाठस्य देशिन: ॥१२५३॥
यृशालिलाजयःवारीणां सिद्धः । लाजतण्डुलोद्भिजनस्य द्वाभ्युहिजितियाणां ॥१२५४॥
मन्दाहिवियुपाग्नानां स्थविरस्त्रीविहितोनाम् । देक्षं सुश्रणाणाम् लाजपेया ॥ सुसंस्कृतः ॥१२५५॥
क्षुतिविपाकयुतः पथ्यः शृङ्गाटस्य च मणवाः । पिप्पि: पिप्पलमूलोऽद्रकोद्यकोऽक्षि मुक्तलाम्ग्यादिभिः ॥१२५६॥
कमचयव्युतः शीता लधवी लाजशालसः ।

Group of dietary preparations

Peyā (liquid gruel) alleviates hunger, thirst, malaise, debility, bowel disorders and fever. It is diaphoretic, appetiser, carminative and laxative.

Vilepikā (paste-like gruel) is saturating, constipating, light and cordial.

Maṇḍa (gruel) is appetiser, carminative, softening for channels and diaphoretic. It supports strength due to appetising property and lightness, in persons subjected to reducing therapy and purgation and also in those having thirst after the fat is digested.

Liquid gruel (prepared) of fried paddy removes fatigue of the person whose voice is feeble.

Gruel water (prepared) of fried paddy pacifies thirst and diarrhoea, produces homostasis, is wholesome, appetiser and alleviates burning sensation and fainting. It is, in well-processed form, prescribed for those having slow and irregular digestion, in children, the old and women, and the delicate ones. This gruel water added with sour pomegranates and boiled with long pepper and ginger alleviates hunger and thirst, is beneficial for channels and eliminates excreta in evacuated persons.

Flour of fried paddy is astringent-sweet, cold and light. [250-256]

सुशीतः प्रशृतः शित्रः संस्कमहीनो भृगः ।।१२५७।।
भृशपाकलुलिमानुनि मार्गेल्माणयादिभिश्चः । अमितीडप्रशृतीदेशः शीतेखाश्यौदनो गुरुः ।।१२५८।।
मांसकञ्चकगतिसेधुमग्लणवनशीयनाम् । सत्त्वः सर्पाण्य बुधुरां मृदु संशुध्य च ।।१२५९।।
तथम्याणितिश्रीगतिनेगमाल्गनशीलताः ।

Odana (boiled rice), prepared of well-cleaned grains, devoid of water, well-cooked and warm is light. In conditions of poisoning and kaphaja disorders,
