XXVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              219

द्राक्षाखर्जूरसंयोगसंस्कारं च सञ्चिकृतम् । गुणकर्माणि लेहानां तेषां तेषां तथा वदेत् ॥१२६८॥

Pānaka (syrups) prepared of grapes, dates and jujube is heavy and distending.
So is that of paruṣaka, honey and sugarcane products. Properties and actions of these
syrups should be defined by knowing the combination of pungent and sour substances
and the ingredients, with their quantity separately.

Various types of rāga sādava (or rāga and sadava) are pungent, sour, sweet and
salt, light, palatable, cordial, appetiser and relishing. Leha (lickable paste) of āmra
and āmalaka is bulk-promoting, tonic, relishing and saturating owing to unctuous-
ness, sweetness and heaviness. Properties and actions of lehas should be determined
on the basis of combination, processing and quantity of ingredients. [279-283]

रक्तपित्तकफोत्क्लेदि शुक्तं कानलोमनम् । कन्दमूलफलादि च तद्विधानादवस्थयम् ॥१२६४॥
शिण्डाकी चान्यत् कालान्तं रोचनं लघु । सिद्धान्तं कृतानामनेकसंज्ञानं भिषक् ॥१२६५॥

Śukta (a type of vinegar) irritates rakta, pitta and kapha and is carminative. The
properties of fermented beverage should be determined on the basis of its ingredients
such as tubers, roots, fruits etc.

Śiṇḍāki is another fermented beverage which becomes sour by the time factor
(period of fermentation). It is relishing and light.

Thus the physician should know the eleventh group dietary prepara-
tions. [284-285]

कषायद्रव्यसंस्था यत्कृपण्यं व्याधि च । विपलं बह्विकिपूर्णं न च श्रलेष्माभिवर्धनम् ॥१२६६॥
वातानुबन्धनं मल्यं लध्यं मेथाशिवर्धनम् । तैलं संयोगसंस्काराद् सर्वरोगापहं मतम् ॥१२६७॥
तैलयोगाद्वारा निर्मिकारा निलायम: । आरात्रिलाता: संखे दैत्याभिचाव: पुरा ॥१२६६॥
ऐरण्डतैलं मधुरं गुरु श्लेष्माभिवर्धनम् । बातहरुगुणबहुरोगार्णिनाशकरं परम् ॥१२६९॥
कट्वग्नि माधुरं तैलं रक्तपित्तभृधनम् । कञ्चुकोष्ठविनाशनम् ॥१२९०॥
त्रियालतैलं मधुरं गुरु श्लेष्माभिवर्धनम् । द्वितियसिद्धि तलौघव्याधियोगे धातिसिद्धे: ॥१२९१॥
आलस्यं मधुरस्य तु विपाके कट्वङ्ग तथा । उण्मादीर्घ दिव दाहे रक्तपित्तकोपनम् ॥१२९२॥
कुसुम्भतैलगुण्यं च विपाके कट्वङ्ग गुरु । सिद्धिश्च विशेषेण सदेदीपकगुणोपनम् ॥१२९३॥
कालानं खावे चाभ्यानि तैलानाहारसंसिद्धौ । दृष्टानं गुणकर्मभ्यां मानि बृद्धायनाचाराम् ॥१२९४॥

Group of adjuvants of food :

The sesamum oil is sweet with astringent as subsidiary taste, penetrating,
hot, readily absorbed, aggravates pitta and kapha, is constipating, anti-diuretic,
the best among the vāta-alleviating, strength-promoting, beneficial for skin,
promotes intellect and appetite. It destroys all diseases due to combination (of
drugs) and processing. By the use of oil the kings of demons, in early times,
became free from old age, diseases and fatigue and proved very strong in battle.
