220                              CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                                [CH

Castor oil is sweet, heavy, kapha-aggravating and relieves of vātarakta, gulma,
heart disease and chronic fever.

Mustard oil is pungent, hot, affects rakta and pitta, diminishes kapha, semen
and vāta, and alleviates itching and urticarial patches.

The oil of priyāla is sweet, heavy, aggravates kapha but because of its excessive
hotness it is not recommended in combination of vāta and pitta.

The linseed oil is sweet-sour, kaṭu-vipāka, uṣṇavīrya. It is useful in vāta but viti-
ates rakta and pitta.

The oil of kusumbha is hot, kaṭuvipāka and heavy. It particularly causes burning
sensation (with acidity) and vitiates all doṣas.

The properties and actions of the oil of other fruits (seeds) used in food may be
known on the basis of the fruits. [286-294]

मधुरो वृंहणो गुरुभो मज्जो मज्जन सखा बसा । यवासलं तु शीलयोभो बसाभकयोभिर्विदितेऽहि ।।२९५।।

Marrow and fat are sweet, bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac and tonic. Their coldness
or hotness be known according to the animals (from which they are derived). [295]

सन्दे दीपनं वृष्यमुष्णं नातीकक्षोपयम् । विपाको मधुरं ह्रद रोचनं विष्वभेषजम् ।।२९६।।
शलीभसा मधुरं चाड़ी गुरी निगया स विपर्यया: सा शुक्का पकवानानी कट्रुण्या कृष्णसंशता ।।२९७।।
नात्युष्णगुणो मरिचबद्धुर्णां ह्रद रोचनम् । छेदितात्संखोणहासकः दीपनं कफवातजित् ।।२९८।।
पाञ्चलेशिविज्ञयातं कटूर्ण दीपनं लघु । विद्ध शूलशमनं विधाय पाचनरोचनम् ।।२९९।।
रोचनं दीपनं संतूष्टं बह्नुष्यमितिसाधि तं । विदीर्णेणे संमधुरं रैकपूर बलवर्णनीम् ।।३०० ।।
तीक्ष्यानदीप्यात्संतुष्टात्र्वां संतीक्ष्यम् बलीकश्वम् । सौर्वेबिलं विकमार्णं बह्नुमुद्गनरोशियं ।।३०१।।
तैक्ष्यादीप्यात्संतुष्टात्विलोदनं श्लेष्मशासनम् । ऊर्ध्वं वायव्यं बलात्तायाद्गतुल्यमूकं विरेचनम् ।।३०२।।
सतितकक्षः सधारं तीक्ष्यगुणाल्लेहि अविदेत्य न कालायवणं गमाः सौर्वेर्णिमुण्याख तं ।।३०३।।
सामुदश्च संमधुरः सासितं काटं पांजतुम् । रोचनं लवणं सर्वं पाचितं संयुचिन्गयाः ।।३०४।।

Dry ginger is slightly unctuous, appetiser, aphrodisiac, hot, alleviates vāta and
kapha, is madhura-vipāka, cordial and relishing.

Green long pepper increases kapha, is sweet, heavy and unctuous. The same when
dried alleviates kapha and vāta, is pungent, hot and aphrodisiac.

Black pepper is not very hot, non-aphrodisiac, light, relishing, appetiser, allevi-
ates kapha and vāta due to its extracting and absorbing characters.

Hiṅgu (asafoetida) alleviates vāta, kapha and constipation, is pungent, hot, appe-
tiser, light, intestinal antispasmodic, digestive and relishing.

Saindhava (rock-salt), the best among the salts, is relishing, appetiser, aphro-
disiac, vision-promoting, not causing burning sensation, alleviates tridoṣa and is
slightly sweet.
