XXVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               221

Sauvarchalā salt, due to its penetrating, hot, light and aromatic properties, is
relishing, laxative, cordial and normalises eructation.

Bida salt, owing to sharpness, hotness and quick absorption, is appetiser, re-
lieves colic, expels wind both upwards and downwards.

Audbhida salt is slightly pungent-bitter and alkaline, sharp and irritant.

Kāla (black) salt has all the properties of sauvarcala except the smell.

Sāmudra is slightly sweet while pāṃsuja is pungent and slightly bitter.

All salts are relishing, digestive, laxative and alleviate vāta. [296-304]

इलायाचुबकचीरांगलीहालहालहासाम् । कासं कफजगलिसि वायुको व्योषितं ।।३०५।।
तीक्ष्णोणो लघुकक्षं बलेदी फला विहारः । शाखो दीपयकेवः सर्वः क्षारोऽधिसिक्तिः ।।३०६।।

Yāvasūka (alkali derived from the awns of barley) relieves of heart disease,
anaemia, grahaṇīroga, spleen enlargement, hardness in bowels, throat troubles, cough
caused by kapha and piles.

All alkali are sharp, hot, rough, moistening, digestive, rupturing, burning, appe-
tiser, cutting and like fire. [305-306]

कारवी कुटुकमकाजाजी शावकी शाम्यगुमुः । रोचनं दीपनं सातं आहारकद्वीर्नभयाशनम् ।।३०७।।

Kāravī, kuṭicikā, ajājī, yavānī, dhānya and tumburu–these are relishing, appe-
tiser, and alleviate vāta, kapha and foul smell. [307]

आहारोणिनि सकिचिबायो न तु विद्यते । समासगो द्वादशायो वर्ग आहारोणिनाम् ।।३०८।।

There is no certainty or limitation of the attachment to (particular) adjuvents of food.
Thus ends the twelfth group of the adjuvents of food. [308]

शुकधान्यं समीयान्यं समपतितं प्रशस्तकं । पुराणं प्राशयो मकं योगयाधिभिनं गुरु ।।३०९।।
यादरापक्षती विदं अतलघुपुरनं शुकम् । निकृतं धुक्तिपुत् च शूम लघु विमक्षते ।।३१०।।

Cereals and legumes are recommended for use when they are one year old. The
old one is mostly rough while the new one is mostly heavy. The crop which comes
shortly is regarded as lighter. The legumes, when dehusked and properly fried digest
easily. [309-310]

मृतं कृशं वातिनेयं वृद्धं बालं विषेधयम् । अगोवरभूतं व्यालपुदितं मांसपुरुषतेः ।।३११।।
अतोऽन्यथा हितं मांसं वृद्धेषु व्यवहारकम् ।

Meat of animals who died natural death, are emaciated, too much fatty, old,
young, killed by poisons, not maintained on pasture graze and bitten by snakes, tigers
etc. should be discarded. Meat of animals other than the above is wholesome, and
promotes bulk as well as strength of the body. [311]

प्रीयाः सग्रेयूणां कृतो मांसरसः परम् ।।३१२।।
शुकपान् व्याधिचुपाणां कृशानां क्षीणोत्साहस् । कलनागिनिभि चैव रसं विद्याचयायुशम् ।।३१३।।
संसिरोगशमनं यावासं विहितं रसम् । विद्याच् सर्वं बलकरं बुद्धिवृद्धिचिवारिषम् ।।३१४।।
व्यायामिनिषाः खलित्या मद्वात्यादां थे रसाः । नित्यं मांसरसाहारा नातुराः शूरा दुर्बलाः ।।३१५।।
