About the editor-translator

Prof. P.V. Sharma, the editor-
translator of this text, is well known for
his valuable contributions in the field of
Ayurveda. During the last four decades
he has written on various aspects of
Ayurveda-literary as well as scientific,
conceptual as well as historical.

Born on 1st November, 1920 in a
small village (Mustafapur) near Patna,
the ancient Pataliputra, in the family of
traditional Vaidyas. School career in
Vedarata Vidyalaya at the home village.
University career in Ayurvedic College
of Banaras Hindu University. Graduated
in Ayurveda in 1940. Also did M.A. in
Sanskrit and Hindi and Acharya in
Sanskrit Sahitya later on.

Teaching career started in 1946
as Professor and later Vice-Principal in
Ayurvedic College, Begusarai (Bihar).
In 1953 appointed, as lecturer in
Ayurvedic College, B.H.U., in 1956 took
over as Principal, Govt. Ayurvedic
College, Patna and Superintendent
indigenous Medicines Bihar. In 1960
appointed as Dy. Director of Health
Services (I.M.), Bihar. In 1963 joined as
Professor of Dravyaguna in P.G.
Institute of Indian Medicine, B.H.U., and
also worked as officer-in-charge and
later as Director of the Institute and
Dean, Faculty of Indian Medicine.

Prof. Sharma has been
participating in international
conferences on human sciences and
has been associated with several
committees on Ayurveda on National
level. He has authored about two dozen
books and has published about 300
papers and articles. He has also edited
a number of Sanskrit Medical
Manuscripts which were hitherto
unknown in the Ayurvedic world.

Complete in Four Volumes

About the text

The Caraka Samhita stands at the
top of the ancient texts representing the
School of Medicine in Ayurveda founded
by the great Scholar-Sage Scholar
Atreya. Its value is further enhanced by
the fact that it is the only text available
in complete form where as other
contemporary Samhitas such as of
Jatukarna, parasara etc. perished, that
of Bhela is incomplete and that of Harita
is dragged into controversy. Thus any
scholar desirous to know about the
fundamentals of Ayurveda and its
approach to life, health and disease
has essentially to take resort to the
study of this text unique in depth and
divergence. It is rightly said "whatever
is not here can't be found anywhere
else."

Historically too, it is quite
interesting. Like an archaeological
edifice. If it is dug into one would come
across three distinct strata of authorship
ascribed to Agnivesa, Caraka and
Drdhabala in successive order.

And Translation ....

This immensely valuable text
needed since long a faithful and simple
translation into English communicating
the ideas as they are without divulging
into dogmatic details which make the
situation worse particularly for a young
scholar. This comes from the pen of an
erudite scholar of Ayurveda who has
devoted the major part of his life in
studying the text intensively from
various angles and has command over
both the languages concerned.
