viii

Was Caraka an individual or a traditional group? Some scholars opine that
Caraka was one of the branches of black Yajurveda and the persons following this
branch formed a sect known as Caraka. Thus perhaps Caraka, the annotator of the
Caraka-saṃhitā, was a person belonging to that sect. There was also a branch of
Atharvaveda known as 'Vaidyacāraṇa', now extinct, which was perhaps more
intimately connected with the tradition of vaidyas who served the masses while
moving from village to village. This very mobile character (Cāraṇa) might have
been responsible for the nomenclature 'Caraka'. This is supported by the theme of
the Caraka-saṃhitā which is based on movement of the scene of activities from
one place to another. Bhāvamiśra has said that Caraka was the incarnation of Śeṣa
(Nāga) which is based, on one hand, on the identity of Caraka and Patañjali and,
on the other hand, gave rise to speculations that Caraka belonged to the sect of
Nāgas who at one time were very powerful and established their footholds in
several parts of the country.

Sylvan Levi, on the basis of the Chineses version of the Buddhist Tripiṭaka,
has established that Caraka was the royal physician of the Emperor Kaniṣka who
belonged to Ist or 2nd Cent. A.D. but on the internal evidences it does not stand.
Kaniṣka was a staunch Buddhist and the scholars attached to him like Aśvaghoṣa,
Nāgārjuna etc. were all Buddhists while Caraka shows his faith in vedas,
brahmanism and positivism. Moreover, it looks improbable that a freely moving
mendicant like Caraka might have accepted the bondage of a royal court. Hence
Caraka, the annotator of the Caraka-saṃhitā, can't be the same person as the royal
physician of Kaniṣka. It is possible that the name 'Caraka' being popular at one
time was given to more than one person. Aśvaghoṣa, the poet laureate attached to
Kaniṣka has not mentioned the name of Caraka though he has said Ātreya as the
propounder of the School of Medicine. Had Caraka been his colleague he must
have mentioned him. Lastly, this information found only in the Chinese version
can't be taken as authority for establishing a historical fact.

The probable connection of Caraka with Kaniṣka leads to some more important
but hidden points. Kaniṣka belonged to the Kuṣāṇa dynasty which was an offshoot
of Śakas who came to India roaming about from Central Asia. C. Kunhan Raja
views 'Caraka' not as a Sanskrit word but a Pahlavi one 'Cāreka'³. Then the word
'Caraka' began to be used for inferior type of people⁴. In Nānānītaka, Caraka is

1. C. Kunhan Raja : Survey of Sanskrit Literature, p.277.
2. ध्यायकसरकसंयुक्तायश्च–Arthaśāstra, 2.29.13.15.
   चारकस्मम् :–Kāśikā 6.3.19. (also 5.1.17).
   वनचारकाद्येन्तायाम्–Jātakamāla, p.63
   वेदकर्णेन मुख्येते चरकलोकेन श्रेणेऽद्विशस्य–Naiṣadhīyacaritam, 4. 116.
