xiv

should be brought to the notice of the scholars and should draw their attention
towards the need of such a critical study. The errors may be due to oversight in
printing, editor's discretion in selecting the particular version and use of inadequate
number of random manuscripts for editing. The last reason has been responsible
for a number of anomalies in the text which created further confusion. Some of
these points will be discussed here.

1. While classifying the drugs, Caraka has described them as three types-
   jāṅgama, bhauma and audbhida. Further also he has used the same terms but
   in the present edition the editor has preferred the version 'Pārthiva' instead of
   'Bhauma' which does not seem to be reasonable.

2. Caraka has mentioned latex of three plants for evacuative purposes such as
   snuhī, arka and aśmantaka–the word 'kṣīra' is explicitly used with snuhī
   and arka but the same is absent with aśmantaka¹ which has led to several
   speculations and reservations regarding identity of the plant. Had there been
   no such anomaly, the original version should have been ''स्नुह्यर्कस्नगकक्षीर्य'' instead
   ''स्नुह्यर्कस्नगकं विद्यात्''. This is supported by the fact that the word kṣīra has been
   more than once in this context.²

3. ''मरिचलन् त्वक् कुटजातु सङ्कुरात्'' (C.Sū. 3.15) the word ''सङ्कुरात्'' would be appro-
   priate in place of ''सङ्कुरात्'' because the root and not the bark of kuṭaja is used.
   The present version means that bark is to be taken of kuṭaja alongwith kuṣṭha
   which is anomalous.

4. The idea of Caraka is that only knowing the plant by name or form is not
   suficient but one should also be conversant with its therapeutic uses. Hence
   the version ''योगविचयरूपज्ञः'' in the present edition (Sū. 1.122) is not appropriate
   because it does not convey the author's idea correctly.

5. In the group of anti-emetic drugs, the mention of 'yaṣṭika' (C.Sū. 4. 14) is not
   correct. It should have been 'ṣaṣṭika' as corroborated by its inclusion in fatigue-
   alleviating drugs alongwith other cereal drugs (C.Sū. 4.16).

6. The reading ''षष्टिकान्, शालीसमुद्गांश्च'' (C.Sū. 5. 12) though adopted by Cakrapāṇi
   does not seem to be reasonable. It should be ''शालिषष्टिकमुद्गांश्च''.

7. Caraka says that even the excessively heavy diet is not capable to pacify the
   (digestive) fire which is fuelled by fat (C.Sū. 13.71(a)). Here the version in
   the present edition is ''स्नेहसमुद्भवं'' which should be more befitting as ''स्नेहसमित्कम्''.
   Moreover, this line here is superfluous because it has been read in full
   elsewhere (C.Ci. 15.201).

१. वमनेऽस्मन्तकं विद्यात् स्नुह्यर्कक्षीरयोर्विरेचने । क्षीरनायायां विष्फर्णोम सर्वविरेचने ।। (C.Sū. 1. 115.)
२. C.Sū. 1. 119. 139
