xv

8. The term 'upakrānta' has been used althrough in the sense of "treated" but at
   one place it is "anukrānta"¹ which seems to be an error. Similarly, at another
   place (C.Sū. 10.4) the editor has opted for 'anuṣṭhu' instead of 'upakrānta'
   which is also not proper.

9. In over-obesity unctuous annointings and baths have been mentioned as
   etiological factors. Hence in over-leanness these should be contrary to the
   above such as non-unctuous annointings and abstinence from bath whereas the
   present version (C.Sū. 21.12) does not convey this idea.²

10. 'Āsīnapracalāyitām' (C.Sū. 21. 20) this version even following by Carkrapāṇi
    does not seem to be correct. The correct version should be "āsīnaṃ
    pracalayitam.³

11. In the introductory part of the chapter XXII (Sū.) ''कृताकृतातिसुनवादिनाम्'' should be
    corrected as ''कृताकृतसामितम्''.

12. The word 'Dhātu' denotes normalcy and as such it does not require any
    medicament. Hence in the present version ''तदौषधो धातुनो'' the word ''धातुनो'' should be
    replaced by ''रोगजन्ता'' as mentioned in footnote as alternative reading.

13. Caraka has invariably followed a definite order in placing the things. Hence
    any deviation observed should be taken as textual error. Judging from this
    criterion ''स्वयथस्नेहनं'' (S. Sū. 25.30) should be for ''स्वेदस्नेहनं'' similarly ''आलुक्फलानि''
    should be placed before ''निकुचफलानि'' (C.Sū. 25. 39) because it is in
    contravention to the order followed in the preceding paragraph.

14. ''लांवकेक्कुर्मोधे'' should be read as ''लांवकेक्कुर्मुखेधे'' like ''रायंद्रमुर्ध्वेधि'' in the preceding
    sentence (C.Sū. 25. 40).

15. ''निर्वृतिः पुष्टिकरणम्'' (C.Sū. 25. 40) would be more befitting as ''निर्वृतिः पुष्टिकरणम्''.

16. The word ''निःसंशयकरणम्'' has been repeated (C.Sū. 25. 40) which has not been
    done in any other case and as such it seems to be an incorrect version. In my
    opinion, the version in the second place would be ''निर्णयकरणम्'' instead of
    ''निःसंशयकरणम्''.

17. In ''हिरण्यक्षः कौशिकः'' the word ''कौशिक'' should be read as ''कुशिक'' that the name

1. कुशालते तनुजाक्षः। शिरं संप्राप्ते सुरौ ।
   'Tvanukrāntāh' should be read as "Tūpakrāntaḥ".
2. Here ''स्वल्पोद्वर्तगै'' and ''स्नानाभ्यक्तशय्ये'' should be substituted by ''स्वल्पोद्वर्तन'' and ''स्नानाभ्यक्तशय्ये''
   respectively.
3. अहस्तिण्डस्तक्तितल्क्षितविपर्तस्तीधिकहिं भूमेरे 'अस्वखं'' and अनन्तमिष्टैव the two adjectives relate to the person
   observed as Āsīna'' and Pracalāyitam respectively. If we take one ''Āsīnapracalāyitam',
   the above two adjectives contrary to each other would not fit there and become anomalous.
