xvi

   of the sage was 'हिरण्याक्षः कुशिकः' is confirmed by his reference as such in the
   preceding chapter (C.Sū. 25. 14-16). In fact, Kauśika has contradicted his
   views and as such may be a different person belonging to his clan or by
   his son.

18. ''तत्त्वमस्नुतवतर्लोते सक:'' (C.Sū. 27. 25) the word ''तत्त्वम्स्वादु:'' should be replaced by
    ''सस्वादु:''.

19. The word ''जंगलचारिणः:'' (C.Sū. 26. 55) though adopted by Cakrapāṇi does not
    seem to be correct version. It should be जंगलवारिणः: like जलचारिणः.

20. In description of vegetables also (C.Sū. 27), Caraka has followed an order. In
    the end he has given the description of tubers but in the midst surprisingly the
    description of ''Sarṣapa sāka'' has come which is definitely a later interpolation
    by some (Punjabi?) scholar fond of ''Sarson kā sāg''.

21. ''परुषक मृदुकं च पातलेयं न शस्तते'' (C.Sū. 27. 128) here the repeated use of 'Ca' does
    not seem to be proper. It should be ''तालनिये प्रशस्तते''.

22. ''मधुराण्यनुपानिने पिलानःसेभद्राणि च'' (C.Sū. 27. 163) here ''मधुराण्यनुपाकीनि'' should be
    substituted for ''मधुराण्यलपाकोनि'' as indicated by Cakrapāṇi and from relevance
    of the context 'anupākīnī' means the fruits of the plant known as anupākī.

23. Caraka discusses the mode of nourishment of dhātus and malas by ābhārasa
    and mala respectively. Looking to this the present version in the text seems
    to be incorrect and needs to be rectified.¹

24. In nidāna of Kaphaja gulma (C. Ni. 3. 10) ''अन्नबुद्धरिम्'' should be read as ''अबुक्षरम्''
    because while hungry if one takes too much water it may cause kaphaja
    gulma. This is corroborated by other texts as well. The word ''अन्नबुद्धरिम्'' does
    not fit here.

25. In the chapter of prameha (C. Ni. 4. 10), there is one ikṣuvālikārasameha
    among the ten types of kaphaja premeha but later while describing it, it is said
    to cause passing of urine similar to the juice of kāṇḍekṣu. It looks anomalous
    because ikṣuvālikā and kāṇḍekṣu have been mentioned separately (C.Sū. 25.
    49, vi. 8. 135) and as such are different plants. The correct version should be
    'इक्षुवालिकारसंकारार्द्र' in place of 'काण्डेक्षुरसंकारार्द्र'.

26. In the treatment of gulma, there are some cūrṇa yogas (formulations of powders)
    which have to be taken with some sour liquids. Here the word ''शूलानाहहरि'' should
    be ''शूलानाहहरि'' because it qualifies the word ''चूर्णयोगः''. Here 'peyā' does not mean
    "liquid gruel" but is a verbal form meaning "should be taken as drink".²

१. धातवो मलत्मानः: प्रसादाख्यो मलसत्ना: पुष्यन्त: should be read as धातवः मलस्मानाः प्रसादाख्यो मलसत्मानाः पुष्यन्तः।
२. यः चूर्णयोगः........। शूलानाहहरी पेया बीजपूरस्रेन वा । (C.Ci. 5. 76-77)
