xxi

13. Cakrapāṇidatta–He wrote 'Ayurvedadīpikā' com. on the Caraka-saṃhitā and
    Bhānumatī com. on the Suśruta-saṃhitā. He is also author of the Cakradatta
    and Dravyaguṇa-saṃgraha. His teacher Naradatta also wrote some com. on
    the Caraka-saṃhitā. His father, Nārāyaṇadatta, and elder brother, Bhānudatta
    were attached to the king Nayapāla (1038-1055 A.D.) of the Pala dynasty of
    Bengal.

14. Vṛndakuṇḍa–He is quoted by Niścalakara and Śivadāsa Sen. Vṛndaṭippaṇa
    quoted by Āḍhamalla¹ seems to be his main work.

15. Vāpyacandra (Vāspacandra)–He is the author of the Vāspacandra tantra and
    a nighanṭu in addition to his commentary on the Caraka-saṃhitā and possibly
    on the Suśruta-saṃhitā. He is quoted by Vijayarakṣita, Śrīkaṇṭhadatta,
    Niścalakara, Hemādri and Śivadāsa Sen.

16. Īśānadeva–He was son of Keśavadeva, the king of Tripura. He is quote
    by Vijayarakṣita, Śrīkanṭhadatta, Vācaspati and Niścalakara.

17. Guṇākara–He has written some Vṛtti on the Caraka Saṃhitā and is quoted
    by Niścalakara. He seems to be different from the preceding author.

18. Bhavyadatta–His commentary is quoted by Śivadāsa Sen. His other works,
    Vaidyapradīpa and Yogaratnākara, have been quoted by Niścala kara.

19. Bakula kara–He is quoted by Niścalakara and Śivadāsa Sen. He has written
    commentary on the Saṃhitās of Caraka as well as Suśruta.

20. Śivadāsa Sen–He is the author of the 'Caraka-Tattvapradīpikā' commentary.
    He has also written commentaries on Cakradatta, Dravyaguṇasaṃgraha,
    Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya and Yogaratnākara (of Bhavyadatta). His father, Ananta Sen
    was attached to Barbak Shah, the king of Bengal (1457-1474).

21. Gaṅgādhara Roy–(1799-1855)–He wrote a scholarly and voluminous com-
    mentary 'Jalpakalpataru' on the Caraka-saṃhitā which was published with
    Cakrapāṇi's com. from Calcutta (1927). He was a prolific writer and has
    written a dozen books on Ayurveda and about five dozens on other subjects
    like tantra, philosophy, grammar, literature, religion etc.

22. Yogindranātha Sen (1871-1918)– He is the author of the commentary
    'Carakopaskāra' which is published incomplete. He was the son of
    Dwārakānātha Sen and a disciple of Gaṅgādhara Roy.

23. Jyotiścandra Saraswati–He belonged to Bengal. His commentary
    'Carakapradīpikā' was published only upto Sūtrasthāna.

1. Śārṅgadhara. (Madhya. 8.14)
