xxiii

3. Organisation of symposia :

For advancement of knowledge and research they adopted the method of
discussion among experts. Symposia were organised in different parts of the country
in which experts of the subject participated¹. These participants placed their views
freely often contradicting the other's view. Lord Ātreya is seen presiding over
these symposia who concluded often correlating all the views. The workers and
authors presented their work in the conference of expert scholars and it was only
after their approval that the works were recognised by the academic circle. This
method of mutual discussion and symposia was responsible for developing the
broader scientific outlook which led to the study of problems from various angles
to arrive at the truth.

4. Psychosomatic approach :

Caraka-saṃhitā holds the synthetic view of man instead of analysing him into
hundreds of parts and reducing him as aggregate of tiny cells. Happiness and
unhappiness are the final consequence of health and disease respectively and these
affect the person wholly and not partly. Tridoṣa as well as psyche pervade the
whole body, therefore in health and disease one will have to consider the person
as a whole who is known as 'Puruṣa' in Āyurveda. This gave rise to the
psychosomatic approach towards health and disease. Tridoṣa and psyche interact
with each other and as such the disorders will have to be viewed accordingly.
This 'deha-mānasa' (psychosomatic) approach is a very important contribution of
the Caraka saṃhitā in the field of medicine. Mind effects body and vice versa.
Hence any partial veiw can not lead to proper understanding and successful
management of the problems. Alongwith the 'Yuktivyapāśraya' treatment
'Sattwāvajaya'² (Psychotherapy) has also been given due place.

5. Individual constitution :

Side by side with the formulation of general concepts, Caraka had laid proper
emphasis on individual psychic and somatic constitution. Man is not a machine
and as such can't be operated equally with a uniform law. Every person has got
his own individuality and normal variations. This forms his constitution which
distinguishes him from other individuals. This is termed as 'Prakṛti'. Every regimen
or therapy has to be applied keeping in view the constitution of the concerned
person³ and his suitability (sātmya). The modern concept of allergy, anaphylaxis
or idiosyncrasy may be interpreted on the basis of this old idea of prakṛti.

1. C. Vi. 4.    2. C. Vi. 8. 70-80.    3. C. Ni. 1. 5.    4. C. Sū. 20. 20.
5. C. Sū. 10.5.  6. C. Sū. 16.27.     7. C. Sū. 16. 16-20  8. C. Sū. 28. 6.
9. C. Sū. 5. 13.
