4                             CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

thya, Cyavana, The Bhārgava (of Bhṛgu's Clan), Abhijit, Gārgya, Śāṇḍilya, Kauṇḍilya
(nya), Vārkṣi, Devala, Gālava, Sāṅkṛtya, Baijavāpi, Kuśika, Bādarāyaṇa, Baḍiśa,
Śaraloma, Kāpya, Kātyāyana, Kāṅkāyana, Kaikaśeya, Dhaumya, Mārīca, Kāśyapa,
Śarkarākṣa, Hiraṇyākṣa, Lokākṣa, Paiṅgi, Śaunaka, Śākuneya, Maitreya, Maimatāyani
alongwith the saints of the Vaikhānasa and Vālakhilya orders and other great sages.
They all, sources of spiritual knowledge, selfcontrol and restraint of mind, illumined
with brilliance of penance like fire having oblations, took their seats comfortably
and held auspicious deliberations. [8-14]

धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणामारोग्यं मूलमुत्तमम् ॥१५॥
रोगास्तस्यापहर्तारः श्रेयसो जीवितस्य च । प्रादुर्भूतो मनुष्याणामन्तरायो महानयम् ॥१६॥
कः स्यात्तेषां शमोपायः इत्युक्त्वा ध्यानमास्थिताः । अथ ते शरणं शक्रं ददृशुर्ध्यानचक्षुषा ॥१७॥
स वक्ष्यति शमोपायं यथावन्नो महामतिः ।

Disease-free condition is the best source of virtue, wealth, gratification and eman-
cipation while diseases are destroyers of this (source), welfare and life itself. Now
this has appeared as a great obstacle for human beings and what could be the means
for their amelioration. Saying this they meditated on this. Then with their meditative
vision they saw Indra as saviour. That god of gods is only able to tell the correct
means of amelioration (of diseases). [15-17]

कः सहस्राक्षभवनं गच्छेद्दू तश्च शृणुयात्तु ॥१८॥
अहमर्थे निद्रेयमिति प्रथमं वचः । भरद्वाजोऽब्रवीत्तस्मादृषिभिः स नियोजितः ॥१९॥
स शक्रभवनं गत्वा सुरर्षिगणमध्यगम् । ददर्श बलहन्तारं दीप्यमानमिवानलम् ॥२०॥
सोऽभिगम्य जयाशीर्भिरभिनन्द्य सुरेश्वरम् । प्रोवाच विनयान्वित्वा मानुषमुपनयन् ॥२१॥
व्याधयो हि समुत्पन्नाः सर्वप्राणिभयङ्कराः । तद्ब्रूहि मे शमोपायं यथावच्चिरजीविनाम् ॥२२॥
तस्मै प्रोवाच भगवानायुर्वेदं शतक्रतुः । पदैरल्पैर्मतिं बुद्ध्वा विपुलां परमर्षयः ॥२३॥

Who should go to the abode of Indra to inquire about this? On this, first spoke
Bharadwāja 'I may be deputed for this work' and so he was deputed by the sages.
Having gone to Indra's abode, he was the killer of Bala sitting in the midst of the
groups of godly sages and glittering like fire. He approched him with felicitating words
of praises and blessings and the intelligent one submitted to him the message of the
sages humbly and in the best possible way–"Diseases causing fear in all living beings
have appeared, so, O Lord of gods, tell me the proper measures for (their) amelioration".
Then Lord Indra, having observed the wide intelligence of the great sage, delivered
to him Āyurveda in a few words. [18-23]

हेतुलिङ्गौषधज्ञानं स्वस्थातुरपरायणम् । त्रिसूत्रं शाश्वतं पुण्यं बुबुधे यं पितामहः ॥२४॥

Āyurveda providing knowledge of aetiology, symptomatology and therapeutics,
best way for both the healthy and the sick, tri-aphoristic, continuing for the time
immemorial and virtuous which was known by Brahmā (creator) first. [24]
