16                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

उदावर्त and constipation. With this very group of drugs may be prepared
unctuous enema for alleviation of vāta. Thus pañcakarma (five measures) is said in
brief. [11-14]

तानूचर्वमचातोदेषणां स्नेहस्वेदोपपादये: । पञ्च कर्माणि कुर्वीत मात्राकालो विचारयन् ॥१५॥

These five measures may be applied to those having presence of doṣas after
performing unction and sweating with due consideration of dosage and time. [15]

मात्राकालाश्चया सुक्तः: । सिद्धियुक्ती प्रतिप्तिता । तिष्ठत्युष्चैर युक्तिज्ञो द्रव्यज्ञानवात् सदा ॥१६॥

Proper administration (of drugs) depends on dosage and time and success is
based on proper administration. Hence, knower of proper administration always stand
at the top among the knowers of drugs. [16]

अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि यवाग्वर्विविधौषधाः । विविधानां विकाराणां सत्तमानां निवृत्तये ॥१७॥

Further, (I) will speak about gruels (prepared with) various drugs for alleviations
of various disorders amenable to them. [17]

पिप्पलीपिप्पलीमूलचव्यचित्रकनागरै: । यवागूर्दीपनी साद्वाग्न्युल्लनी चोससाधिता ॥१८॥

The gruel prepared with pippalī, pippalīmūla, cavya, citraka and śuṇṭhī stimu-
lates appetite and relieves (colic) pain. [18]

दधिमस्तकपत्थाब्जैः रीतकादाविभिःसाधिता । पाचनी ग्राहिणी, पेया सप्तो पाङ्गमूलिक: ॥१९॥

The gruel prepared with kappittha, bilwa, cāṅgerī, buttermilk and pomegranates
is digestive and astringent. The liquid gruel of smaller five roots¹ is useful for
diarrhoea with vāta. [19]

ज्वालपत्नीतचीचित्ते: पृक्षिषय च साधिता । दाधिनाम्ता हिता पेया पित्तलेभ्वातिसारिणाम् ॥२०॥

The liquid gruel prepared with śālaparṇī, balā, bilwa, pṛśniparṇī and soured pome-
granates is useful for diarrhoea and śleṣmika diarrhoea. [20]

पयस्यधयेकः स्त्री ह्रीबेरोत्पलनामिः । पेया रक्तातिसारेटी पृच्छिपर्ण्य च साधिता ॥२१॥

The liquid gruel Processed with hrībera, utpala, musta and pṛśniparṇī and
prepared with goat's milk having half water alleviates blood diarrhoea and is that
prepared with pṛśniparṇī. [21]

द्धाराक सतिलपिचैः पेयां साम तामत्त सनाराम् । इन्दुष्यठटलःचश्वर्गजीलयर्षा मूष्पलो समुलित्सानाम् ॥२२॥

One should prescribe the gruel prepared with atīviṣā and śuṇṭhī and soured (with
pomegranates) in diarrhoea having āma. That of gokṣura and kaṇṭakārī alongwith
phāniṭa should be prescribed in dysuria. [22]

विडङ्गपिप्पलीमूलशिग्रुभर्विरिवे च । तक्रसिद्धा वधाद्ज: स्यात् क्रिमिघ्न्ां ससुवर्चिका ॥२३॥

The gruel of viḍaṅga, pippalīmūla, śigru and marica prepared with buttermilk
and having suvarcikā (a kind of alkali) alleviates kṛmis (helminths). [23]

1. śālaparṇī, pṛśniparṇī, bṛhatī, kaṇṭakārī and gokṣura.
