20                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

Kuṣṭha, both (types of) haridrā, tulasī, paṭola, nimba, aśwagandhā, devadāru,
śigru, sarṣapa, tumburu, dhānyaka, kaivarta mustaka and caṇḍā should be powdered
in equal quantity. These ground with buttermilk should be used for anointing the
body already smeared with oil. By this itching, boils, urticarial patches, skin diseases
and (various types of) oedema are alleviated. [8-9]

कुष्ठत्रुत्तसद्राक्ष्ट्ाद्रृरीकासीसकम्पिल्लकमुस्तलोध्राः ।
सौगन्धिकं सर्जरसो विडङ्गं मनःशिलालेस करवीरकस्यः ॥१०॥
तैलाक्तगात्रस्य क्रताणि चूर्णान्येतानि दद्यादवचूर्णनार्थम् ।
दद्रुः सकण्डूः किटिभानि पामा विचर्चिका चैव तबीत शान्तिम् ॥११॥

Kuṣṭha, tuttha (copper sulphate), dāruharidrā, kāsīsa, kampillaka, musta,
sulphur, rāla, viḍaṅga, realgar, orpiment and bark of karavīra–these powdered should
be prescribed for dusting on the body smeared with oil. Thus ringworm, itching, kiṭibha,
papular eruptions and eczema are relieved. [10-11]

मनः:शिलालो मरिचानि तैलमर्कक्षयः कुष्ठहरः प्रदेहः ।
तुल्यं विडङ्गं मरिचानि कुष्ठं लोह्र च सहा श्लक्ष्णं विशेष्म स्यात् ॥१२॥

Realgar, orpiment, marica, (mustard) oil and latex of arka (plant) mixed together
make a paste for (alleviating) skin diseases. Similar is (that) prepared with copper
sulphate, viḍaṅga, marica, kuṣṭha, lodhra and realgar. [12]

रसाञ्जनं सप्तपलाशबीजं चुक्ते कपित्थस्य रसेन सेच्यः ।
करञ्जबीजैकपाट्ं सकुष्टं योज्यादियाद्वा च परः प्रदेहः ॥१३॥

Rasāñjana and seed of cakramarda mixed with juice of kapittha make a paste (for
the same). Similar is the paste of karañja seeds, cakramarda and kuṣṭha ground with
cow's urine. [13]

उभे हरिद्रे कुटजस्य बीजं करञ्जबीजं सुमनः प्रवालम् ।
त्वचं समांल्यं हयमारकस्य लेपं तिलक्षारयुतं विदध्यात् ॥१४॥

Both (types of) haridrā, kuṭaja seeds, karañja seeds, tender leaves of jātī,
bark and pith of karavīra mixed with alkali of sesamum make a paste (for skin
diseases). [14]

मनः:शिला त्वक् कुटजात् सकुष्ठा कासीसा सुलोह्राः । चैव करवीरास्य ।
विचिष्र भागैः: करवीरकस्य चूर्णानि सात्म्यानि तुषोदकैन ॥१५॥
पलाशनिर्यूहरसेन चापि कर्माणियुर्णानि तुषोदिकायाः ।
दर्वीशर्ड्यं प्रवदन्ति लेपमेतन् दर चूर्णसिद्धदानामं ॥१६॥

Realgar, kuṭaja bark, kuṣṭha, kāsīsa, cakramarda, karañja, bhūrja node and karavīra
roots each 10 gm.–powder of all these should be cooked with tuṣodaka (a type
of vinegar) and the juice obtained from burning the palāśa roots in āḍhaka quantity
