III]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   21

(2.56 litres) till ruduced to semi-solid state. The preparation is used as paste for alle-
viating skin diseases. [15-16]

पणानि पिष्ट्वा चतुर्जातस्य तक्रेण पर्णानि वा काकमाच्याः ।
तैलाक्तगात्रस्य सरस्य कुष्टानुलूर्देकुच्छम्वरश्वरेद् धा ॥१७॥

After grinding the leaves of āragvadha and kākamācī with butter milk, and also
with the leaves of karavīra; the body of the person smeared with oil should be annointed
(in parts affected with) skin diseases. [17]

कलेरं कुलत्था: सुरदारुरात्नामाषातसीद्रैग्वलानि कुष्ठम् ।
वचा शतापुष्यसचयेर्म्यष्णानुष्णानि सामायदेत् प्रदेशः ॥१८॥

Badara, kulattha, devadāru, rāsnā, black gram, linseed, oily seeds (castor etc.)
kuṣṭha, vacā, śatapuṣpā, barley powder mixed up with vinegar and heated make a
useful paste for those suffering from vātika disorders. [18]

आनूपमत्स्यामिषवेसवारैस्यः प्रदेश: पवनाद्यर्तम् स्यात् ।
स्नेहैश्चतुर्भिदेशपूलनिरीलिर्वोष्रमाद्वलिप्तस्य प्रदेशः ॥१९॥

The hot vesavāra (a preparation) prepared with meat of marshy animals and fish
makes a paste for alleviating vāta. Similarly, the paste prepared with four fats (ghee,
oil, muscle fat and marrow), ten roots and aromatic drugs is destroyer of vāta. [19]

तक्रेण कुष्णं यवसुच्चूर्णिं सक्षारमहितीं जरेत् निमम्नम् ।
कुष्ठं शतापुष्यां सवचां यवानां चूर्णं सतैलांक्षसमग्निरं स्याते ॥२०॥

Barley powder mixed with buttermilk, heated and added with alkali removes
pain in abdomen. Kuṣṭha, śatapuṣpā, vacā and barley powder mixed with oil and
vinegar is prescribed in vāta. [20]

उभे शतापुनु मधुके मधूकं बला प्रियालं च कशेरुके च ।
घृतैर्विदार्या सविरादाविद्दिः कुर्यातूप्रदेयं यवये सरेसं ॥२१॥

Both (types of) śatapuṣpā, madhuyaṣṭi, madhūka, balā, priyāla, kaśeruka, vidārī
mixed with ghee and sugarcandy should be used as paste in vātarakta. [21]

रासनां गुडुचीं मधुकं बलेटांदे सयीतजैः साराम्रैश्च सर्वत्र्रंसके पयश्च ।
घृतं च सिद्धं मधुशेषचतुः रस्रिन्तिमीरी प्रण्युदे, प्रदेशः ॥२२॥

Ghee prepared with rāsnā, guḍūcī, madhuyaṣṭi, both (types of) balā, jīvaka,
ṛṣabhaka alongwith milk and added with bee-wax is used as paste for alleviating dis-
comfort in raktavāta. [22]

बाले सर्पिः सयुतैं प्रदेही गौर्घयुदूचूर्ण छगलीपयश्च ।
नाडीसरलं चन्दनकुष्ठपूलमे शिरोरोगाणामथ्वा सपूतं प्रदेशः ॥२३॥

In vātarakta, wheat flour mixed with goat's milk and ghee is used as paste. In
headache, tagara, utpala, candana and kuṣṭha mixed with ghee is used as paste. [23]

प्रपौण्ड्रीकं सुरदारु कुष्टं मधूसुकं(मधुमता)मलं कमलोत्पले च ।
शिरोरोगर्थ सपूतं प्रदेहो लोहीं चकाणकारीव ॥२४॥

Prapauṇḍarīka, devadāru, kuṣṭha, madhuyaṣṭi, elā, kamala, utpala, aguru, crakā,
padmaka and coraka mixed with ghee make a paste for headache. [24]
