22                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

रास्ना हरिद्रे नलदं जताङ्गि द्वे देवदारूणि सितोप्पा च ।
जीवन्तिमूलं सपृतं सतैलमालेपन कोष्ठस्य ॥२५॥

Rāsnā, two (types of) haridrā, jatāmāṃsī, two (types of) śatapuṣpā, devadāru,
jīvantī roots and sugarcandy mixed with ghee and oil are used as warm paste in pain
in sides (of the chest). [25]

शैवालप्रयोगिनगेवेत्रपुत्रागप्रपौण्डरीकणारथरम्यकलोद्ध्रम् ।
प्रियङ्गुकालेयकचन्दनानि निर्वापणे: स्मान्स्त्रमुच्यते प्रदेहः ॥२६॥

Śaivāla, kamala, utpala, vetra, punnāga, prapaundarīka, uśīra, lodhra, priyaṅgu,
kāleyaka and candana mixed with ghee make a heat-alleviating paste. [26]

शितालोत्पलेतसेपद्मक्षानि यष्ठभैहिनीं चैलिकानि दूर्वा ।
यवासमूलं कुशकासयोश्च स्यान्स्ततृमैश्व ॥२७॥

Śvetā mañjiṣṭhā, vetasa, padmaka, madhuyaṣṭi, aindrī, kamala, dūrvā,
roots of yavāsa, kuśa and kāśa, hrībera and erakā are (also used as heat-
alleviating (paste). [27]

शैलेयलेलागुरु कुष्टचन्दनं पत्रं त्वचं सेन्धुवराद्रुस्तथा ।
शीते निहन्यादचिराण प्रदेहो विपं शिरीषं सहसिन्धुवारम् ॥२८॥

Saileya, elā, aguru, kuṣṭha, caṇḍā, tagara, tvak, devadāru, rāsnā–these together
used as paste alleviate cold in no time. Śirīṣa alongwith sindhuvāra counter acts
poisons. [28]

शिरीषलामज्जकनागकेशरलोध्रैः सहिशाकरक्तेभ्वः प्रपर्षः ।
पत्रामुलोधरभचन्दनानि शरीरदौगर्न्ध्यहरः प्रदेहः ॥२९॥

Śirīṣa, lāmajjaka, nāgakeśara, lodhra–when rubbed together (over the skin), alle-
viate skin diseases and excessive perspiration. [29]

Patra, hrībera, lodhra, uśīra and candana make a paste for alleviating foul smell
of the body. [29]

तत्र श्लोका:–
इहादिक्ताः सिद्धसमन्वयाश्च ब्राविंशति सिद्धमहर्षिपूज्याः ।
चूर्णप्रदेहान् विविधामयध्नानारग्वधीये जगतो हिताय ॥३०॥

Now (the summing up) verses–

Here, Atri's son, worshipped by accomplished and great sages mentioned thirty
two successful powder- pastes, destroyers of various disorders, in the chapter of
āragvadha etc. for the welfare of the world. [30]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने आरग्वधीयो नाम तृतीयोऽध्यायः ॥३॥

Thus ends the third chapter on āragvadha etc. in Ślokasthāna in the treatise com-
posed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. [3]

                                  •
