पञ्चमोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER V

अथातो मात्राशितीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on quantity of diet etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

मात्राशी स्यात्, आहारमात्रा पुनरग्निबलापेक्षिणी ॥३॥

One should take food in (proper) quantity. This quantity of food depends on the
power of digestion. [3]

यावद्व्यवसनमतितानुद्वहतः प्रकृतिं यथाकालं जरां गच्छति तावद्स्य मात्राप्रमाणं वेदितव्यं भवति ॥४॥

Whatever quantity of food taken gets digested in time without disturbing the
normalcy should be regarded as the measure of (proper) food. [4]

तत्र शालिषष्टिकामुहलावकलापप्लेणशरशलशरभरम्भभरादीनामाहाराव्यास्यानि प्रकृतिलघून्यपि माथप्रयोगीणि भवन्ति ।
तथा पिष्टशुकुलविकृतिलेतानपाडूपधूद्विकारकायचिनगुद्भाहाराण्यावि प्रकृतिगुरुयाणि माथाभ्यपयोगीष्विरमाक्ष्मीतु (५।।

Thus the articles of food such as śāli, ṣaṣṭika (rice), mudga (pulse), lāva, kapiñjala,
eṇa, śaśa, śarabha, śambara (meats) etc. even though light by nature depend on quan-
tity. Similarly, those such as preparations of flour, sugarcane, milk, sesamum, black
gram, marshy and aquatic meats even though heavy in digestion by nature also depend
on the quantity itself [5]

न चैवमुक्ते द्रव्ये गुरुलाघवमकारणं मन्त्र्यते, लघूनि हि द्रव्याणि वाव्व्वाग्रुणबहुलानि भवन्ति,
गुर्वान्युपार्पात्विगुणबहुलानि, तस्मात् स्वगुणादेव सिपृच्छित्वण्युदगबन्धाप्रजतावन्त्यम्ये बोध्येन्देऽपि सौहित्येपयुज्यानि,
गुरूणि पुनर्नाज्गिशायुक्लमन्यथ-बाग्लासाम्न्यात् । आतगोत्तस्मात् दौषकले सौहित्येतेन तथिव्य व्याधामान्युक्ता; सैक्या
चन्यभक्तमात्रेषिणी मात्रा ।।६।।

By this, it should not be confused that lightness and heaviness of (food) articles
are quite inert. In fact, light articles are predominant in properties of vāyu and agni
while others (heavy ones) are the same in those of pṛthivī and soma (ap). So, by dint
of their properties, the light articles being stimulant of digestion, even taken upto the
saturation point, produce little derangement. (On the contrary) the heavy articles
becasue of dissimilarity, are not stimulant of digestion by nature and thus cause con-
siderable derangment if taken upto the saturation point except in case (of persons
having) physical exercise and (adequate) strength of agni (digestion). Hence, the
quantity (of food) is related to agnibala (power of digestion). [6]
