V]                            SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   37

Smoking pipe which is straight, having three pouches and nozzle of the
measure of jujube seed, made of material similiar to that for enema pipe is recom-
mended. [50]

दुर्गाधिनिर्गः : पर्वैव्छौ नाडीमप्कर्त्कत् ।।५१।।
नेत्रेय बाघते धूमो मांसशल्लिनिवेषितः ।

Smoke coming out from distance, intervened by nodes and diluted by pipe chan-
nel and used in proper dose and time does not damage the sense organs. [51]

यदा कोष्ठं कफ इश्च शिरश्च लघुतां व्रजेत् ।
कफरा कुस्तं वातंपच्छ्न्यूज् ये । अविष्यभक्ि: स्वरो रस्य कण्ठचुं सक्तकौ भवेत् ॥५२॥
सितिंमतो मसराकीतंमौ धूमादिशतो । लागु मुर्षा च कष्टस्य वक्षो गहहोवक्षतेः ॥५३॥
इन्द्रियाणसौरितेषु सुखवाभपति चाय्यवम् । निद्रालपातेः: सुखं स्यात् सम्यग्धीतस्य लिंक्षणम् ॥५४॥

Smoking is said as well-used when chest, throat and head attain lightness and
kapha is diluted.

The same is said as ill-used if voice is not clear, throat is full of kapha and head
is cold heavy.

In case of excessive smoking, palate, head and throat dry up with burning sensation,
the person gets thirsty and fainted, bleeding is increased, there is excessive giddiness
and fainting and dysfunctioning of sense organs. [52-53]

तत्र साब्यपूर्तोत्तं स कालेषु विवे्वैं हरेन् ।।५४।।
प्रायुगर्गप्रसदानेउ गौर्तनो नभसन्यन्सेतु । न तस्य बहुष्णे प्राण न सखुष्यत्ते । ह्ेषमृत्षी य वा पुनः ।।५४।।
न तस्य बाह्यं प्राप्य: क्ले पाटिपतिप्लिप्तेवानि तस्य । अवगन्धाकेशस्यान्नः: सरिवा; शिरेरामेतेते ।।५५।।
नेवैदाव्वाणंर्द्वेन्यं बलं शीर्षस्य साधिष्ये । न तस्य रोगः: सहसा प्रभवन्त्यूवेर्जग्रु जतजा ।।५६।।
सर्वेशान्राणी वैरस्य: बलं यस्थेति चाधिकम् । न तस्य रोगाः: सहसा प्रभवन्त्यूर्धजत्रुजाः ।।५६।।
जीर्णक्षप्ीनमाद्यपि सुलक्ष्म का लखते बलम् ।

Every year one should use anutaila (through snuff) thrice a day in early rains,
autumn and spring when the sky is free from clouds.

One who practises snuffing as prescribed and in time, his vision, smell and
hearing are not affected, his hairs, beard and mustache do not become white or
grey, hairs do not fall rather they grow abundantly. Stiffness in side neck, headache,
facial paralysis, lockjaw, chronic rhinitis, migraine and head tremors are alleviated.
Veins, joints, ligaments and tendons of skull attain greater strength on saturation
through snuffing. Face becomes cheerful and well-developed, voice melodius,
stable and grave. Freedom from defects and increased strength are bestowed upon
all sense-organs. He is not attacked suddenly by disorders of parts above jatru and
