38                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

even in advanced years, old age does not find strength in his best organ, the head (head). [56-62]

चन्दनागुरु पत्र दारूशित्वङ्मधुकं बलाम् ।।६३।।
प्रपीण्डरीकं सूक्ष्मेलां विडङ्गं विल्वमुत्पलम् । ह्रीबेरमर्पे बर्णं त्वगुलसुरां सारिवां शिरसम् ।।६४।।
जीवन्तिं वृद्धिकौ पर्णींच सुरदारू शताबरी । सुष्क्ष्णप्रमाणबलादम्यान शततः कधासानन्त्यः: ।।६५।।
पक्रियापवेकरलानी मांडेक्टे विमलौधस्मीः । तेलालांशोधा पाक्क कावसथामेवा । १६६।।
तेन तैत सुलक्षयोद्दं दशकर्णाबलेयतेव । तैलायाशन्यापोयेर्छ दशामधिविर्द्यिते । ।।६६।।
दधाहोयोऽमृतर्णं स्वर्णेंज्ज्ञीनिलिश्द्दा: । अस्थानात्रितिवृतेतेषुजाङ्दात्रीती खेलेसेजनिनिनांः । १६८।।
निवातदासख्वासारी हितानी निर्मलस्क्विमत्ते: । व्याशाय्रस्त्राणविधः: दोषांनाचौतेयरेरि न्यानाद्य । ।।६९।।
निवाताय्रस्त्राणविधः: दोषणानाचौतेयरेरि खेलेलीमीची । ।।७७।।
प्रयुक्तानां यथाकालं यदिष्टं गुणभोषयते ।

Candana, aguru, patra, dāruharidrā (bark), madhuka, balā, prapauṇḍarīka, sūkṣma
elā, viḍaṅga, bilwa, utpala, hrībera, karīra, vaca, tagara, uśīra, sārivā, kaivarta mustā,
jīvantī, devadāru, śatāvarī, hareṇu, bṛhatī, śālaparṇī, padmakeśara–these
drugs should be boiled in hundred times pure rain water and the remaining decoction
which is ten times of oil should be taken. With this decoction the oil should be cooked
ten times adding equal quantity of goat's milk in the tenth cooking. This is the method
(of preparation) of anutaila to be used as snuff. This oil should be used in dose of half
pala (20 ml.). After oleating and fomenting head parts, the snuff should be taken thrice
with a cotton swab on every third day for a week. During this period, the person should
keep himself in wind-free and warm place, should take whole-some food and having
control on sense organs. Thus using this oil, destroyer of tridoṣa and strength-giving
to sense organs, in proper time one attains the aforesaid benefits. [63-70]

आयोधितायं द्वौ कालौ कषायकटुतिलकञ्च ।।७०।।
भवेत्वेव्ययायर्य दन्तधावनायत्वरीवम् । निजर्वे नर्म वैरस्यं दन्तविदर्शोपनिक्त्वयम् ।।७१।।
निष्कृष्य रुचिमायेम साधो दन्तविराधिनम् । कराङ्कर्वीरिकर्वरच्वाकीजनासानाः ॥७२।।
शस्यने दन्तपर्ये वै चान्ध्यमेष्मव । मसूरकालकिक स्याद ।
विड्जर्विलस्यरूसत्पूर्णीम्जपर्कृनोवपुच्छं थरुज्ञीरिमे । ।७३।।
डिजमुनिमनजीवमाहातेरुस्यल्पाक्तुदल्यस्य इतभुष्रेलाकेंमस्जवत् । ।७४।।
विविधोन्यसभार्रिक हित प्रयितिच्छद्वा । इल्लेस्मनातरिक्तस्नेनिद्ध्यानं प्रलापेति ।। ७७५।।
प्रयुक्तजने व्यत्य हिवनीनन्धुं मैनिनिलिलयोदम् ।

Candana, aguru, pṛthvākā, keśara, nakha, hrībera, candana, patra, twak, elā,
uśīra, padmaka, dhyāmaka, madhūka, māṃsī, kaivarta musta, sārivā, śālaparṇī, jīvantī,
pṛśniparṇī, devadāru, śatāvarī, hareṇu, bṛhatī, kaṇṭakārī, rāsnā, padmakeśara–these
drugs should be boiled in hundred times pure rain water and the remaining decoction
which is ten times of oil should be used. With this decoction the oil should be cooked
ten times adding equal quantity of goat's milk in the tenth cooking. This is the method
(of preparation) of anutaila to be used as snuff. This oil should be used in dose of half
pala (20 ml.). After oleating and fomenting head parts, the snuff should be taken thrice
with a cotton swab on every third day for a week. During this period, the person should
keep himself in wind-free and warm place, should take whole-some food and having
sense control on sense organs. Thus using this oil, destroyer of tridoṣa and strength-giving
to sense organs, in proper time one attains the aforesaid benefits. [63-70]

आद्यातिः श्रेष्ठा कौ कलौ कषायकटुकिक्तानम् ।।७०।।
भवेद्वै यष्टिसमधाँ: सुदन्तारस्य बलागम् । हरितं वर्जयदं तै रसदान्भ्यास्ततविटदि ।।७१।।
द्विरर्दन व्वस्थथा: परं समृद्धि संध्दकदिभुद्धं ।

One should use astringent, pungent and bitter teeth-cleaning (twigs having made
it into a brush) by crushing its top end, twice a day without injuring the gums. Teeth-
cleaning removes (foul) smell, tastelessness and taking out dirt coated on tongue,
teeth and mouth brings relish immediately.

Karañja, karavīra, arka, jātī, arjuna, asana and several similar plants are recommended
for tooth brush.
