VI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   39

Tongue-scrapers should be made of gold, silver, copper, tin and brass and should
be non-sharp and curved.

The dirt which is collected at the root of the tongue and which creates obstruc-
tion in respiration produces foul smell, hence one should scrape tongue. [71-75]

धार्यौत्प्लस्येव वक्षासन्वितिना वस्तिमुखैण ।।७६।।
जातीफलमकुपूरलं लवणं च । कक्षोलस्य फलं चय ताम्बूलस्य श्रृगं तथा । तथा कर्पूरनिर्यासं सुक्ष्मैलायाः फलानि च ।।७७।।

One desiring (taste), relish and fragrance should keep in mouth the fruits of jātī,
katuka, pūga and lavaṅga; kakkola (fruit), auspicious leaves of betel, exudate of cam-
phor and fruits of smaller cardamom. [76-77]

हन्वोर्बलं स्वरसकं वदनोपचयः: परः । स्वाद् घरं च रसज्ञानमे रुचिस्य ।।७८।।
न चास्य कण्ठशोषः: स्यान्कान्शायैद्ये न च दत्य ोः । हर्यं यापति चास्त्रत्य वज्जद्विखरा भवन्तित ।।७९।।
न शुष्यन्त न चामचारं ह्मन्वचोर्षन्चलति वदनम् । परनाषि हार्द्रेतान पल्लशारीतेलीत्तोपघाट्सब्देसाम ।।८०।।

Use of oil gargle increases strength, development of face, taste, relief from
dryness of throat, there is no fear of lip-cracking, teeth are not affected with caries
rather they become firm-rooted. They (teeth) are not painful nor are they oversensi-
tive on sour-taking, they become able to chew even the hardest food items. [78-80]

नित्यं स्नेहाद्विणः: शिरःशूलं न जायते । न खालित्यं न पालित्यं न केशाः: प्रपतन्ति च ।।८१।।
बलं शिरःकपालानामियैदवं कपालम् । पालिन्द्री गाण मुखं चतुरुरसान् ।।८२।।
इन्द्रियाणि प्रसीदन्ति सुलनाश्रवत च चरण्या । नियादभारस्वण पलेमेचरवमागवात्तः ।।८३।।

One who smears his head with unctuous substance daily does not suffer from
headache, alopecia, greying of hair, nor do his hairs fall. By applying oil on head
regularly, strength of skull-parts increases particularly, hairs become firm-rooted, long
and black, sense organs become cheerful and the well-developed, voice melodius,
sound sleep and happiness. [81-83]

न कर्णरोगा वातोत्था न मन्यास्तम्भः: । न दोष्टुतिभायाषिष्टः स्वस्त्यान् कर्णैतर्पमगारत् ।।८४।।

By saturating ears with oil daily, ear diseases due to vāta, stiffness of backneck
and jaws, hard hearing and deafness do no occur. [84]

स्नेहाभ्यञ्जना कुष्माङ्कयं स्नेहवन्नित्य् । भ्यष्नुनुग्रहत्वाद् दृढं क्लेशसहत्तं बा । क्लेशसहत्ता यथा ।।८५।।
तथा शरीरमब्यस्रोभ्य सुलवकं च जायने । प्रशारम्भाणायायारि क्लेशव्यायामसंसहम् ।।८६।।

As a pitcher by moistening with oil, skin by pressing with oil and axis (of a cart)
by using lubricant become strong and jerk-resistant, so by oil massage the body
becomes firm, smooth-skinned, free from disturbances of vāta and tolerant of exer-
tions and exercise. [85-86]

स्पर्शनेन्द्रियं वायुः: स्पर्शने च त्वगाश्रितम् । त्वच्यश्च परमभ्यस्पादास्तमेतेरैम् ।।८७।।
