40                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

Vāyu is predominant in tactile sense organ which again is located in skin, oil
massage is the most beneficial for skin, hence one should use it regularly. [87]

न सातपाताभिहतं गात्रमभ्यङ्गसेविनः । विकारं भजते पञ्चयं बलयापि वा कृषिता ॥८८॥
सुप्रसादिषितादृद्धा बलवान् प्रियदर्शनः । त्वचाभ्यङ्गनित्यसारस्रौऽत्पन्नर एव च ॥८९॥

The body of one who uses oil massage regularly does not become affected much
even if subjected to accidental injuries, or strenuous work. By using oil massage daily,
a person is endowed with pleasant touch, trimmed body parts and becomes strong,
charming and least affected by old age. [88-89]

खरत्वं स्तब्धता रौक्ष्यं श्रमः: सुप्तिश्च पादयोः । सद्य एवोपशाम्यन्ति पादाभ्यञ्ज्निषेवणात् ॥९०॥
जायते सौकुमार्य च बलं स्थैर्यं च पादयोः । दृष्टिः प्रसादं लभते मारुतश्वोपशाम्यति ॥९१॥
न च स्याद् गृध्रसीजातः: पादयोः: स्फुटनं न च । न सिरास्नायुसंकोचः: पादाभ्यङ्गे न पादयोः ॥९२॥

By massaging of oil in feet, coarseness, stiffness, roughness, fatigue and
numbness of feet are alleviated in no time. Further, delicacy, strength and firmness in
feet, clarity of vision are attained and vāta is pacified. By massage of oil in feet, there
is no occurence of sciatica, craking of sole and constriction of blood vessels and
ligaments. [90-92]

दौर्गन्ध्यं गौरवं तन्द्रां कण्डू मलमरोचकम् । स्वेदबीभत्सतां हन्ति शरीरपरिमार्जनम् ॥९३॥

Rubbing over the body alleviates foul smell, heaviness, drowsiness, itching, dirt,
anorexia and vulgar appearance of sweat. [93]

पवित्रं वृष्यमायुष्यं स्नानमूर्जबलप्रदम् । शरीरजरक्लमस्वर्गन्धहरमग्निदीनकम् पारम् ॥९४॥

Bathing is purifying, aphrodisiac, life-promoting, destroyer of fatigue, sweat and
dirt, resuscitative and a good promoter of ojas. [94]

कार्यं वशस्त्रमायुष्यमलक्ष्मीत्नं प्रहर्षणम् । श्रीमत् पवित्रं शस्तं निर्मलाहारयारणम् ॥९५॥

Wearing clean clothes enhances charm, fame, life span; removes inaus-
piciousness, produces pleasure, auspiciousness and eligibility for a congregation. [95]

वृष्यं सौगन्ध्यमायुष्यं कान्यं पुष्टिबलप्रदम् । सौमनस्यमलक्ष्मीघ्नं गन्धमात्यनिषेवणम् ॥९६॥

Use of fragrance and garlands is aphrodisiac, produces good smell, longevity,
charm, nourishment and strength, pleasing manners and destroys inauspicious-
ness. [96]

धन्यं मङ्गल्यमायुष्यं श्रीमद्व्यासनसूदनम् । हर्षणं कान्यमोजस्यं रत्नाभरणधारणम् ॥९७॥

Wearing of jems and ornaments promotes, wealth, auspiciousness, longevity,
prosperity; destroys calamity, enhances happiness, charms and ojas. [97]

मेधां पवित्रमायुष्यमलक्ष्मीघ्नं सनैत्रणुवभर यत् । पादयोर्मलमार्गाणां शौचाधानमभीक्ष्णशः ॥९८॥

Cleaning of feet and excretory orifices frequently promots intelligence, purity,
longevity, and destroys inauspiciousness and dirt. [98]

पौंश्चिकं वृष्यमायुष्यं शुचि स्पर्शेन्द्रिय्यन् । केशश्मश्रुनखादीनां कल्पनं संप्रसाधनम् ॥९९॥
