42                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

mouth gargles and their effects, properties of oil and head oil, properties of ear oiling,
oil massage, massage of feet, rubbing over the body, bathing, clean clothes, fra-
grance, wearing of gems, cleaning, hair cutting, use of footwear, umbrella and stick–
all these have been described in this chapter entitled quantity of food etc. [105-111]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने मात्राशितीयो नाम
पञ्चमोऽध्यायः ॥५॥

Thus ends the fifth chapter on quantity of food etc. in Ślokasthāna in
the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. (5)

                                  •

षष्ठोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER VI

अथातस्तस्याशितीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on 'one's diet' etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

तस्यश्ितायाङादाराधसानवेश्र वर्णं च बलं यवरोगय भविति । यस्यथर्तुसात्स्यं विदिति चेषाहाराव्यमानुष्यम् ॥३॥

One's diet (of various types) leads to promotion of strength and complexion
only if he knows the wholesomeness according to (different) seasons dependent on
behaviour and diet. [3]

तत्र खलु संवत्सरं षडृतुकं विभज्यमानं विद्यात्, तद्यथा-शिशिरोवसन्तौ ग्रीष्मश्च ॠनूनत्तरायणात् षण्मानान्
व्यवस्येत्, वर्षाशरत्, पुनर्वसंनन्तानु, दक्षिणायनं विसगैं च ।।४।।

Here, the year has got six parts according to division into seasons. Amongst
them the (period of) three seasons–from śiśira to grīṣma–is known as ādāna (receiving)
when the sun takes northward course; (the period of other three seasons) from varṣā
to hemanta is visarga (releasing) with the sun following its southern course. [4]

विसर्गे पुनर्वायवो गतिसङ्गाः; प्रशान्ताः; इन्दुश्च पुनरनावृतः; सोमंडापयाब्नित्रणसुचः; शिशिर्धर्मशिर्भीव च तेषामाद्यावानि, शान्तिर्व्यायाहवाहनवं
शक्रः, अतो विसगैं: सौम्यः । आदानं पुनरग्नेयैं; तावेतावर्कवायू सोमन्च काल्यवाभगमृत्यधियाच्चगृहीताः; कालुत्तार्मेवारि
बलनिर्मुपेश्वायावभूताः समुपदिश्यते ॥५॥

In the period of visarga winds are not very rough as in ādāna; moon, unobstructed
by clouds, replenishes the world continuously with its cold
rays, thus visarga is saumya (having predominance of soma). On the other hand,
ādāna is agneya (predominant in agni). Thus the sun, the wind
