VI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   45

on the body and diet mainly consisting of barley and wheat. During spring, one should
eat meat of śarabha (wapiti), śaśa (hare), eṇa (antelope), lāva (common quail) and
kapiñjala (grey partridge) and drink harmless vinegars and wines. Thereafter, he should
enjoy the blossoming beauty of women and forests. [22-26]

मधुकङ्गाजः: स्नेहं बीभो येयोयते रविः: । स्वादु शीतं द्रवं स्नैहिकस्ममयाभजेत् तदा हिमम् ॥२७॥
शीतं सशकोरं मन्थं जालुंलानुनष्ठसुपाम् । पूरा पयः; ससारायहूं भक्तानु बीभो च सौदिते ॥२८॥
मध्यभत्यनं वा मेघयेष्विहि्वाममेय सरलाकफरूनकै: । लवणाकाच्कित्तपि्कचूर्णामान कान्न्ताभस्तानोः सुखायुमयवान्न ॥२९॥
दिवा शीतगृहे निद्रां जर्दाङ्गःशीतलं तताा । भजेद्यावकासंविन्द्यं तयेक्ेसमधीतदगेलं वेतेमाश्वकाल्यनायसंमा ॥३०॥
व्यक्ते: पाणिसंस्पर्शयैः स्तनैर्वष्णरेकवारोहनैर्लूप्तेसैर्वरैः: दो । सुबाहुकावम्ती रामाः; शरायनो मृगश्वभ्योऽसम्भविः ॥३१॥
कारमायनि च शौलुानि ज्लाते कुसुनानि वै । मौष्मकाते वियरेमेयैत् मैदुणाद्विरतो नरः ॥३२॥

During summer, the sun with his rays, draws up excessively the moisture of the
nature hence in that season, sweet, cold, liquid and fatty food and drinks are benefi-
cial. The person taking regular cold and sweet mantha (unctuous drink), meat of wild
animals and birds, ghee and milk with red rice does not suffer during summer. Wine
should be taken in a little quantity or with plenty of water or should be left altogether,
salted, sour, pungent and hot (food) and also physical exercise should be avoided.
One should take sleep in cool room during day and on the top (roof) of the house
with abundant air and cooled with moon rays during night, having pasted sandal
on his body. One adorned with pearls and gems should take seat having been atten-
ded with fans and hand touch which are cooled with sandal water. During summer,
one should resort to forests, cold water and flowers avoiding sexual intercourse
altogether. [27-32]

आदानदुर्बल्ये दिनेगे न भवति दुर्बलः । तं वर्षास्वनिलादीनि दूष्यन्यंभ्र्गल्ये पुनः ॥३३॥
भूषाप्रवाक्सीरवनाद्याद् पाकाद्विवीनसलस्त तु । यायेप्राधिमयेो होनौ वुप्नित्वानेत्त्वलो देशसह्येपथ्यक्षेयरतः ॥१३४॥
तस्मात् साचारणः सर्वौ विधिविर्सौ प्रशस्यने । आयौधनेऽयवा चैव व्याध्यायातार्वद्वचेयेये ॥३५॥
व्याप्यामधूमदुर्गम्दी वमनश्वंत्र्युगद्राम्प्रचयन । लघूरुस्तरयायिः सौहिल्यमेवमाम्यनीरेत चौयीयाम् ॥३६॥
आलिहत्क्षदुग्धादध्राशी सुच्चाम्रेघ्वर्षापरम्प् । प्रकामं च निषेवेत नैतौयेर्ष शिरीरगामये ॥३७॥
दीर्गाभदि वस्त्रपरपादान्तिातः शुयनि च । प्रखमूतज्ज्यजामाल्मुद्धयान्मधुप्मेचरसविगाम ॥३८॥

During the period weakened during ādāna (period), the digestion becomes poor
which is further disturbed by the disorders of vāta etc. during rainy season. Due
to earth vapour, humidity of clouds and sour pāka (transformation) of water, the
power of digestion is weakened and vāta etc. are aggravated during the rainy
season. Hence, moderate living is recommended for this season. During the rainy
