50                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

The urges of greed, grief, fear, anger, vanity and also of shamelessness, envy,
excessive attachment and desire of taking another's property should be held up by
the wise. [27]

परुषस्यातिमात्रस्य सूचकस्यानृतस्य च । वाक्वेगस्याकालस्य च धारयेद्धीमानुत्स्थितम् ॥२८॥

One should check the impending urge of speech which is harsh, betraying, lie
and untimely used. [28]

देहप्रवृत्तिर्या काचिद्विहिता परपीडया । स्त्रीगमनेस्तेयहिंसाद्या तस्या वेगान्विधारयेत् ॥२९॥

Whatever bodily action causes pain to others like adultery, theft and violence
should be checked in its impending urges. [29]

पुण्यशब्दो वियायनानमनोवाछ्यवकोमणाम् । धर्मार्थकामम्रुर्यकः सुखी थहेः विनोंति व ॥३०॥

The virtuous-named person, because of having thought, speech and action free
from vices, is really happy and enjoys and earns virtue, wealth and desire. [30]

शरीरचेष्टा या चेष्टा स्थैर्यार्थ बलवर्धिनी । देहव्यायामसंख्याता मात्रया तां समाचरेत् ॥३१॥

The bodily movement which is meant for producing firmness and strength is known
as physical exercise: one should practise it in moderation. [31]

लाघवं कर्मसामर्थ्यं स्थैर्यं दुःखसहिष्णुता । दोषक्षयोऽग्निवृद्धिश्च व्यायामादुपजायते ॥३२॥

By physical exercise one gets lightness, capacity to work, firmness, tolerance of
difficulties, diminution of impurity and stimulation of agni (digestion and metabo-
lism). [32]

श्रमः; क्लमः; क्षयस्तुष्णा रक्तपित्तं प्रतामकः । अतिव्यायामतः कासो ज्वरच्छर्दिश्च जायते ॥३३॥
(स्वेदगमन: श्वासदुष्टगन्तिरोक्तेथा तदुत्यायतातविष्यो प्रत्ययायासेहेतव्-

Excessive physical exercise gives rise to fatigue, exhaustion, emaciation, thirst,
internal haemorrhage, darkness before eyes, cough, fever and vomiting. (33)

(Appearance of perspiration, increased respiration, lightness of the organs,
feeling of obstruction in cardiac region etc. are the signs of proper physical
exercise). (1)

व्यायामहास्यभाष्याध्वयानस्थानव्यवायगात् । नोचिताज्ञपि सेवेत बुद्धिमानतिमात्रया ॥३४॥

The wise should not indulge excessively in physical exercise, laughter,
speech, travelling on foot, sexual intercourse and night-vigil even if he is accustomed
to them. [34]

एतानेवोचितान्ज्ञात्यानू चौऽतिमार्त्र निषेवते । गजं सिंह इवाकर्षन् सह्वासं स विनश्यति ॥३५॥

One who indulges excessively in these or similar other activities perishes sud-
denly like a lion dragging an elephant. [35]

(अतिव्यायमभारावकमीभ्यामतिकृश्त्वितः । क्षोधार्दीस्भस्त्रयाथमि: कान्स्य यौ वापि मानवा: । ॥३१॥
बालवृद्धव्यातासक च चौचम्ममे्थिम्सक्तः । ते सर्वेदुग्ध्न्यानिव क्षुण्डिनातु विषत्स्य वै ॥३२॥

(The persons who are much emaciated due to excessive sexual indulgence,
weight-carrying, travelling on foot and evacuative measures and are victims of anger,
