VII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   51

grief, fear and exertion, the children, the old and those having aggravated vāta, those
who speak too much and loudly; are hungry and thirsty should abstain from physical
excercise.) (1-2)

उचिताहितासात्म्यान् क्रमशः विरजेत् । हितं क्रमेण सेवेत क्रमशस्त्वोपयोजयेत् ॥३६॥
प्रज्ञेपापचये साम्यां क्रमः पादांशिकोऽ भवेत् । एकान्तरं ततश्चोर्ध्व ज्ञानवान् भक्तमर्थं तथा ॥३७॥

A wise person should alienate himself from the habitual malpractices gradually.
Adoption of good practices should also be in similar way. The gradual order should
be like this:–

In the first phase, alienation and adoption should be limited to the quarter por-
tion. The second phase should be on the next day and succeeding phases at the inter-
val of two and three days respectively. [36-37]

क्रमेणापचितो दोषः; क्रमेणोपचितश्च गुणाः । यतो नोत्पद्यतेऽनर्थस्तस्मा्रमो भवति च ॥३८॥

Demerits given up gradually and merits adopted in the same way become ever-
prevented and unshakable respectively. [38]

सम्यमित्तलिकरूयो: केचिद्गृय्य्यंते मानवा: । दृश्यन्ते वातलाः केचिद्पित्तलाः श्लेष्मलास्तथा ॥३९॥
तेषामनातुराः पूर्वं वातलाद्यात् सदातुराः । दोषानुशविता ह्यौषो देहप्रकुतिरुच्यते ॥४०॥

From the very time of conception, some persons are having equilibrium of pitta,
vāta and kapha while others are seen vātala, pittala or śleṣmala (having predominance
of vāta or pitta or kapha).

Amongest them, those in the first category are disease-free while others
(vātala etc.) are always ill. Ever attachment of a particular doṣa is known as body
constitution. [39-40]

विपरीगुणस्तेषां स्वस्थवृत्तेर्विधीयते । समसर्वरसं सात्म्यं समधातोः: प्रशस्यते ॥४१॥

For them, those measures of health are prescribed which are opposite to proper-
ties (of that particular doṣa). For the one having equilibrium of dhātus use of all the
rasas equally would be wholesome and is thus recommended. [41]

द्वे स्रः: सपृथक्शिरांसि खानि स्वेदनुद्भरोजे च । मलच्चमानि बाध्यन्ते दुष्ट्णोंद्याविकर्मभैः ॥४२॥

Two below (anus and urethra), seven in head, other channels and openings of
sweat (glands) are excretory passages which are obstructed by excreta vitiated and
increased in quantity. [42]

मलवृद्धिं गुरुत्वयां लाघवमल्पलक्षवम् । मलत्वानां बुद्धौ स्यात् सङ्गोऽस्त्रगातिहेसे च ॥४३॥

Increase in malas should be known by heaviness and decrease in those by light-
ness of the excretory passages and also by excessive constipation and elimination of
excreta respectively. [43]

तानू दोषानित्येदिस्नामू स्यादीन् साध्यानुषाथरेत् । व्याधिहेत्रुप्रतितद्धाशाकलौ विचायेन ॥४४॥
