अष्टमोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER VIII

अथात इन्द्रियोपक्रमणीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on introductory description of sense-
organs. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

इह खलु पञ्चेन्द्रियाणि, पञ्चेन्द्रियद्रव्याणि, पञ्चेन्द्रियाधिष्ठानानि, पञ्चेन्द्रियार्थाः: पञ्चेन्द्रियबुद्धयो भवन्ति,
इत्युक्तमिन्द्रियाधिकारे ॥३॥

Here are five sense organs, five matters of sense organs, five locations of sense
organs, five sense objects and five sense perceptions, thus said in the context of sense
organs. [3]

अतीन्द्रियं पुरुषं: सत्त्वसंज्ञकं, 'चेतः' इत्याहुरेके, तद्यार्थ्सेन्द्रियवशेचेष्टाप्रवृत्तभूतमिन्द्रियाणम् ॥४॥

Mind transcends the sense organs and, in general, is known as sattva while some
call it as cetas. Its action is dependent on its objects and accomplishment of self and at the
same time, it is responsible for the action of sense organs. [4]

स्वार्थेन्द्रियार्थसन्निपूपर्व्वत्पन्नमानस्यावेकनेकमेकास्मेन् पुरुषे सत्त्वं, रजस्तमः:सत्त्वगुणयोगाच्च; न चानेकत्वं, नक्षेत्र
होकस्तलमनेकेष प्रवत्ते तस्मात्तैककलपना सवैन्दियज्ञानि ॥५॥

Apparently, mind, in person, seems to be more than one because of variations in
its own objects, sense objects and its analytical activity and also due to conjuction
with the qualities of rajas, tamas and sattva; but, in fact, there is no numerousness.
One (mind) does not attend to more than one at a time that is why there is no activity
of all the sense organs simultaneously. [5]

यद्गुणं चाधिकृत्ये पुरुषमनुवर्तते सत्तं तत्तत्सवेमेयोपदिशन्ति मुनयो बाहुत्यनुरुशयातू ॥६॥

The quality which is predominantly and time and again present in mind of a
person is the basis on which sages have described the mind according to its pre-
dominance. [6]

मनः पुनः:सरणीन्द्रियाणष्टर्महेणसमर्थानि भवन्ति ॥७॥

The sense organs are capable of perceiving their objects only when they are sup-
ported by mind. [7]

तत्र षद्भः; क्षेत्रे प्राणा रसा स्पर्शनमिति पञ्चेन्द्रियाणि ॥८॥

Visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory and tactile are the five sense organs. [8]

पञ्चेन्द्रियद्रव्याणि–खंवाय्वग्न्यतेयोऽपो भूरिति ॥९॥

Five matters of sense organs are–Ākāśa, Vāyu, Tejas, Ap and Pṛthivī. [9]
