VIII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   55

पञ्चेन्द्रियाधिष्ठानानि–अक्षिणी कर्णौ नासिके जिह्वा त्वक् चेति ॥१०॥

Eyes, ears, nostrils, tongue and skin–these five are locations of sense organs. [10]

पञ्चेन्द्रियार्थाः–शब्दस्पर्शरूपरसगन्धाः ॥११॥

Five sense objects are–sound, touch, vision, taste and smell. [11]

पञ्चेन्द्रियबुद्धयः; ताः; पुनरिन्द्रियेन्द्रियार्थसत्त्वात्मसन्निकर्षजाः, क्षणिकाः, निश्चयात्मकाः,
इत्येतत् पञ्चपञ्चकम् ॥१२॥

Five sense objects are visual perception etc. These are produced by the
contact of sense organ, sense object, mind and self. They are momentary and deter-
minative. This is about five pentads. [12]

मनो मनोर्थो बुद्धिरात्मा चेत्यध्यात्मद्रव्यगुणसंग्रह: शुभाशुभप्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिहेतुः, द्रव्याश्रितं च कर्म; चदुष्यते
क्रियेति ॥१३॥

Mind, objects of mind, intellect and self are, in brief, the substances and quali-
ties pertaining to self. This entire group is the cause of inclination towards and ab-
staining from auspicious and inauspicious acts respectively. Action (also) known as
therepeutic measures is dependent on substance. [13]

तस्नानुमानगम्यमानां पञ्चमहाभूतविकारसमुदायात्मनामपि सतामिन्द्रियाणां तेजश्चक्षुषि, खं श्रोत्रे, घ्राणे
क्षितिः, आपो रसने, स्पर्शनेऽनिलो विशेषेणोपपद्यते । तत्र यद्यदात्मकमिन्द्रियं विशेषात्सलद्रव्यकमेवानुगृह्णाति,
तत्त्वभावाद्विभुत्वाच्च ॥१४॥

Among the existent sense organs which are comprehensible by inference and are
composed of combination of the resultants of five mahābhūtas–the visual, auditory,
olfactory, gustatory and tactile organs–have predominance of tejas, ākāśa, pṛthivī, ap
and vāyu respectively. Thus the sense organs perceive the respective objects accord-
ing to predominance of their constituent mahābhūta, because of their similarity of
nature and (specific) capability (for sense perception). [14]

तदथिनीयोगायोगेनियोगंग्यः समरेक्षणेन्द्रियैः विकृतियनेषष्डना यथास्वं बुद्धिष्टुपयाता संपयेते, सामध्येयोगेन
पुनः प्रकृतिभावमायति यथास्वं बुद्धिमप्याति ॥१५॥

In case of the sense organs alongwith the mind having been deranged due to
excessive, negative and perverted conjuction with the sense objects, the respective
sense preception gets disturbed. Again with their balanced use when all returns to
normalcy, it promotes the respective sense perception. [15]

मनस्तत्वं चिन्त्यमर्थ: । तत्र मनसो मनोर्बुद्धेश्च त एव समानातिहीनमिथ्याद्यीना: प्रकृतिविकृतिहेतो
भवन्ति ॥१६॥

The object of mind is that which can be thought of. The balanced, excessive,
negative and perverted conjuctions are the causes of normalcy and abnormality of
mind and its sense perception. [16]
