58                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

of own kins or those of noble families; move around the place with fire menace. One
should not laugh loudly, release flatus with sound, set in yawning, sneezing or laugh-
ter with uncovered mouth, deform the nose, grind the teeth, sound the nails, strike
the bones, scrape the earth, cut the grass, press the earthen lump, perform any abnormal
action in body parts. One should not see light and undesirable, impure and inauspi-
cious objects, produce any abnormally loud sound at the sight of corpse, and tread on
the shadow of sacred or otherwise person. During nights, one should not stay for long
in temples, sacred place, raised platforms, cross roads, gardens, cremation ground
and the place of execution; enter alone in a deserted house or a forest. One should not
be attached to women, friends and servants with sinful conduct, antagonise superiors
and be attached to inferior persons. One should not take interest in crooked things,
take shelter with the ignoble and create fear. One should not be indulged in undue
courage, excessive sleep, night vigils, bath, drinks and food, should not stay for long
with knees up and move towards fierce animals and those having prominent teeth and
horns. One should abstain from easterly wind, the sun, dews and excessive winds and
should not initiate quarrels. One should not worship fire except in lonely and pure
condition and should not heat his body in downward position. One should not take
bath naked and except being free from exhaustion and having sprinkled over the face
first, should not touch the head with bathing cloth, should not strike at the hair tips
nor put on the same cloths after bath. One should not go out without touching the
gems, ghee, the respectable, the auspicious and flowers. One should not go through
keeping the respectable and the auspicious on left and others on right side. [19]

नारर्म्यालंभनास्त्रान्ते नोपहतवसना नामाल्यो नाह्कता देवतानिःसेब्य पितृम्यो नाद्वला गुरुभ्यो नाहिभ्यो
नोपाक्षित्व्येभ्यो वयुप्राज्ञा नामाछ्वितिगच्छिनानां वायुद्ध्वा नोद्वयुकधे न वियास नायर्सिंहास्यप्मुन्द्विजम्वा
परिसरां न पञ्जमिमेग्यां नाद्रसे नाकानो सहायो नादव्या्यो प्रमादी शौत्कृदिनं मृत्रचम्बेण मत्तृरमिंम्यविधानंच न कुल्सनीत
कुलितानी न प्रतिक्रोधेतमत्रद्वष्वरेत, न पर्युषितासंस्रव्य गरस्स नायुद्वशिच्छायुमासंष्कमदस्तरस्य मनेमे्नरिश्याम्वर्गं भवेल्वः, नार्से भृष्रुच,
दण्डहव्यता-ससम्रस्निष्ये, न तक्र दधि भुशीन्त, न समक्षेत्नानीनीति निशि न चुक्कम्बा न वृहात् द्विर्तेदकान्ताम,
न त्यिश्र्धा द्विजनर्षयेकुनू ॥२०॥

One should not eat (wearing) gems on fingers in hand, without taking bath, with
damaged clothes, without reciting mantras, without offering oblation to gods, without
making offerings to forefathers, without offering food to preceptor, guests and
dependents, without purifing fragrance and garland, without washing hans, feet and
face, with unclean mouth, facing towards north, depressed in mind, having disloyal,
indisciplined, unclean and hungry attendants, in unclean plates, in improper place,
