60                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

One should not insult noble persons and preceptors, nor should one perform
spells, worship of the sacred place and the honourable persons and study while
unclean. [23]

न विद्युत्स्नायुतेऽह्नि नाभ्युदिताय दिद्य नाद्भिमध्ये न भूमिकम्पे न महोत्सवे नोल्काप्रदे न महाग्रहोपप्लवे न
नक्षचग्रासौ तिथौ न सन्ध्ययोर्नापुगुरार्वावचेऽश्वितौ नातिमात्रं न तारं न विस्वर मानसाभिरुपय् नातिनूनं न
विलम्बितं नातिकर्णिं नात्युच्चैनीचैर्वा, स्वरवर्ण्यवनवचमस्ये ।।२४।।

One should not study when there is unseasonal lightening, quarters look as if
they are lighted during outbreak of fire, earth quake, grand festivals, fall of meteors,
eclipse of big planets (solar or lunar); on the date of new moon, in dawn and dusk,
without having been instructed by the preceptor's mouth, one should not pronounce
words in low, high, weak or deranged voice, without proper accents, neither too fast
nor too slow, with excessive impotency and neither with too high nor too low pitch of
sound. [24]

नातिसत्तमं जहात्, न नियमं भिन्द्यात, न वर्क्ं नादोशे चरेत्, न सन्ध्यासमन्वयव्रह्मचर्यवश्ञनसेवी स्यात्, न
बालवृद्धमूढमूर्यकर्लिलप्लनीषैरु सह संख्यं कुर्याद्, न मद्यद्युतस्त्रापसङ्गरुचिः; स्यात्, न गुह्यं विवृणुयात्, न
कञ्चिदवजानीयात्, नाहंयानौ स्याद्रदकेशो गांद्रक्षिणो नासुयक:, न ब्राह्मणान् परिवदेत्, न गवां दण्डमुपाक्ष्येद्, न
वृद्धांश्च गुरूंश्च गण्टांश्चच नृपांश्च षञ्चादेहिद्बेयं, न चाधिक्षुयात्, न चान्यबन्मसनूक्ब्टक्छुर्हलितेयादुद्व्वहास्ं बहिष्कुयर्ति ।।२५।।

One should not give up the traditional practices nor should one be in habit
of breaking rules, one should not move in night and to improper place. One should
not eat, study, perform coitus or sleep in dawn and dusk; one should not make
friendship with the boys, the old, the greedy, the fools, the afflicted and the enunchs.
One should not have interest in wine, gambling and prostitutes. One should not
disclose secrets nor should one insult anybody; one should not be conceited, un-
skilled, unfavorite and envious. One should not insult the brāhmaṇas nor should one
take up the sticks to (beat) the cow; one should not abuse the old, the preceptors, the
administrative class and the king, one should not speak too much nor should one
turn out kins, persons attached, that who stood along in difficult times and the person
who knows the secrets. [25]

नार्थौरी नाब्युद्धितुरस्य: स्याद्, नाभूतभृत्यां, नाविस्रब्सन्तपन्व्यो, नैकः; सुखी, न दुःखशीलाचारोपचार:, न
सर्वशंकी न समिभिजज्ञौ न सर्वकालविचारी ।।२६।।

One should not be impatient or over-exhilarated; one should not be that who has
not supported his attendants, confided in his kins, is happy alone and has unpleasant
conduct, behaviour and attendance. One should not confide or suspect on all nor should
one be critical at all times. [26]
