VIII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   61

न कार्यकालमतिपातयेत्, नापरीक्षितमभिनिविश्तेत्, नेन्द्रियवशगः: स्यात्, न चञ्चलं मनोऽनुभामयेत्, न
बुद्धीन्द्रियाणातिभारेमाददीत्, न चातिदीर्घसूत्री स्यात्, न क्रोधहर्षयोर्वश्र्वमुपगच्छेत्, न शोकमनुवतेत, न सिद्धावुतूल्केन
चक्चभानीत्यौ दैन्यं, प्रकृतिभ्योभर्थं स्यरेत्, हेतुप्रभावनिष्ठत:ः स्यान्विचार्यसच्चनसचस्थ, न कृतमिथ्याचसेत्, न वीर्यं
जहयात्, नायथार्यमनुस्मरेत् ।।२७।।

One should not postpone things at the time of action nor should one take up
anything without examining it; one should not be submissive to his sense organs nor
should one turn his unstable mind round; one should not over burden the sense or-
gans, one should not be too much dilatory; one should not act under the emotions of
anger or exhilaration. One should not live under continued grief. One should not feel
exhilarated in success and depressed in failure; one should always keep his constitu-
tion in mind. One should be confident of the effect of a cause and as such should
always initiate the cause, one should not assume that now nothing is to be done, one
should not give up courage nor should one remember his scandals. [27]

नाहित्स्नायमत्त्यग्नावतिलिह्रप्रांसभैरेगि गुह्यसभ्यत्थानापीपिर्दनासाद्य, अभिर्मं नापरश्च्छेद्गेनौरतालिनजाष्यं प्राणायाद्याद्
विष्णुवे नसमायद्धाचद् इन्द्रो मे बौर्यं शिरा मां प्रदेशायाय आच्यौ हि त्वेखप:: स्पृशेद्, हि: परिवृण्योषौ पादौ चाच्छ्यां हृदयं
शुधैनि खानि श्लोमस्पुसेदिरामानेम हृ्द्य शिरश्च ।।२८।।

One expressing blessings for him should not offer oblation to fire with cow ghee,
barley, sesamum, sacred grass and mustard while unclean, one should touch water
reciting the mantras 'Agnirme nāpagacchet' etc. After touching the lips and feet,
one should touch with water all the orifices in head, and location of self, heart and
head. [28]

ब्रह्मचर्यज्ञानदानमैत्रीकारुण्यहर्षोपेक्षाप्रशमपरः स्यादिति ।।२९।।

One should be devoted to celibacy, knowledge, charity, friendship, compassion
cheerfulness, indifference and calmness. [19]

तत्र श्लोकाः:–
पञ्चचद्ञ्च्क्तदेशानिं नानेयं हैतुच्तच्युच्चयम् । इन्द्रियोपक्रमणस्याद्ये सद्वृत्तमखिलेन च ।।३०॥
स्वस्थवृत्त यथादिष्टं यः सम्यक्चनुतिष्ठति । स स्मवा: शतसांयायिष्यु न विपुज्यले ।।३१॥
नृलोकमायुयर्ते यशसा साधुसङ्घता: । धर्मार्थविरतिं भूतानां बन्धुतामुपगच्छति ।।३२।।
परगं सुकृतिनो लोकानू पुण्यकमी प्रपद्यते । तस्माद्वृत्तमनुचेयमिदं सर्वेण सर्वदा ।।३३।।

Now the summing up verses–

The five pentads, mind, four causes and the code of good conduct have been
described fully in the chapter on introductory description of sense organs. One
who follows the code of conduct for the healthy, lives a life of hundred years without
any abnormality. Such person, praised by the noble ones, fills up the human world
