IX]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   63

बहुता तत्र योग्यत्वमनेकविधकल्पना । संपच्चेति चतुष्कोऽयं द्रव्याणां गुण उच्यते ॥७॥

Abundance, effectivity, various pharmaceutical forms and excellence of com-
position–these are the four qualities of drugs. [7]

उपचारज्ञा दाक्ष्यमनुरक्तत्व शौचं चेति चतुष्कोऽयं गुणः: परिचरे जने ॥८॥

Knowledge of nursing, dexterity, loyalty and cleanliness–these are four qualities
of an attendant. [8]

स्मृतिर्निर्देशकारित्वमभीरुत्वमथापि च । ज्ञापकत्वं च रोगाणामातुरस्य गुणाः स्मृताः ॥९॥

Memory, obedience, fearlessness and providing all information about the disor-
der–these are the qualities of a patient. [9]

कारणं षोडशगुणं सिद्धौ पादचतुष्टयम् । विज्ञाता शासिता योक्ता प्रधानं भिषगत्र तु ॥१०॥

This quadrupled consisting of sixteen qualities is the cause of success but here
also the physician is the main because of his having specific knowledge, administra-
tive and managing positions. [10]

पकष्टा हि कारणं यत्कुर्याद् वाद्येननलम् । त्रिजेतुर्विजये भूमिक्षमू: प्रहरणानि च ।।११।।
आतुरधातावधौ सिद्धौ पादा: कारणसंख्यिताः । वैद्यत्यसाहिषिकिबाधूप्रधानं कारणं भिषकू ।।१२।।

As in the act of cooking, utensils, fuel and fire and in victory of the victorious
land, army and weapons are causative factors, similarly, in the success of a physician
in treatment (of disorders) patients etc. are mentioned as causative factors. The
physician is the principal cause. [11-12]

मृदुष्पवकमसृद्रायाः; कुम्भकारादुतें यथा । नावहन्ति गुणं वैद्यादृते साध्यामनामयम् ॥१३॥

As earth, stick, wheel, thread etc. do not serve the purpose of (making a pitcher)
without the potter, the other three legs are in the same position without the
physician. [13]

गन्धवैंर्वज्ञज्ञा वधिकारः: सुदारुणाः: । यानि यच्कतेरे बृद्धियात्प्रुपागचर्तीक्षिणा: ।।१४॥
सति पादत्रये अङ्गौ भिषजगासं कारणम् ।

That extremely severe disorders vanish like the (imaginary) city of gandharvas
and even simplest disorders aggravate in want of proper management in spite of the
three other legs being existent, confirms that the learned and the ignorant physicians
are responsible for the above two consequences respectively. [14]

वर्त्मानां हालोऽज्ञेन चिकित्सा प्रवर्तिता ।।१५।।
पाणिमारायाधारुम्मचुक्षान्याच्लीलतयेव । नीर्यलतयेशौन्यो मिथक् चरति कर्मसु ।।१६।।

It is better to self-immolate than to be treated by an ignorant (physician). As a
blind man moves about with the help of the movement of his hands and as a boat
under storm, the ignorant physician, due to ignorance, proceeds in the therapeutic
management with too much fear (and lack of confidence). [15-16]
