66                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

recover while others in similar conditions die. Thus therapeutic measures have prac-
tically no role. It is similar to a little water thrown in a ditch or a pond or a handful of
dust scattered as a flowing river or a heap of dust. On the other hand, there are
patients who, in spite of the lack of necessary materials, attendants, patience and ex-
pert medical service, recover; while others in similar condition die. As while being
treated patient recovers and (in similar condition) other dies; and even while not be-
ing treated he recovers and (in similar condition) other dies. Hence it may be taken
that therapeutics is not different from non-therapeutics. [4]

मैत्रेय ! मिथ्या विन्दस्वे्त्युवाच ।।५।। किं कारणं, ये धातवः; योक्तमात्रुगुमस्मुद्दिर्त्ते्वप्रोके् भेषजेवेत्वनुभा प्रियनम
इव्युक्तः तदुरत्पद्यम्, न हि भेषजसाध्याया व्याधीनां भेषजकारणाम् भवति; यथा हि पुरस्तानुचले: केचिद्वूणोचिदेयतेन्-
न चे स्वसंज्ञ्यन्ति तथा सुमुषोस्वाश्थितावाय्ये बनक्तितास्लंनि प्रसिदृधासिः सहपादाश्वाद्विधामा यद्धि पुरुप्रकाशविद्यन
सेक्तरेगधौषिकरिरिल्त यद्धेदात्त्थादीनि क्षेत्रि्यमेन्य्ा, तथा सर्वाथा भेषजसाध्या ये ध्ातवः; कल्यणेदेश्योसाध्या अन्याते
से त्तक्कूर्त्यनेन प्रतिकुर्वेन् क्रियते, अत्रितकुर्यहेष्यतादिनेग्विन्नथं मेषजत्य भेषजादिक्षणम् ।।६।।

Maitreya ! you think wrongly–said Ātreya. The argument is this–that patients
inspite of having been treated with therapy equipped with sixteen qualities die is
incorrect because therapy is never impotent in respect of curable diseases. However,
the patients who recover without the entire therapy, in these cases too, it is not
correct to say that administration of total therapy does no' contribute to the recovery.
For instance, when somebody helps a fallen person, even if he himself is able to get
up, he stands up more quickly and easily. Likewise, the patients recover with
administration of total-therapy. In case of the patients who die even after the total
therapy, they all are not liable to recovery after therapeutic administration because
all deseases are not curable by therapeutic measures. On one side, there is no cure
of curable diseases without applying therapeutic measures and, on the other side,
the therapeutics has no role in case of incurable diseases, even a learned physician is
not capable to doing a dying patient. Hence the skillful people always act after
careful examination (of the situation). As an archer having theoretical knowledge
and practical experience in the art, does not fail when he takes the bow and strikes
the arrow to a not distant and big object and thus achieves the desired result, like-
wise, the physician, endowed with his qualities and equipped with all necessary
materials, proceeds with treatment of the patient) after careful examination,
