XII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   69

चतुर्विधविकारत्वाद्य व्याख्या: स्वरुषलक्षणम् । उक्ता महाचतुष्पादे येच्चायं भिषगजितम् ।।२४।।

Now the summing up verses–

Therapeutics, qualities of (four) legs (of therapeutics), effect of therapeutics,
views of Ātreya and Maitreya, conclusion of two divergent views, four categories of
diseases (according to prognosis) with their respective characters–All this has
been described in the chapter on great quadruple on which the therapeutics
depends. [23-24]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने महाचतुष्पादो नाम दशमोऽध्यायः ॥१०॥

Thus ends the tenth chapter on great quadruple in Ślokasthāna in the
treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. (10)

                                  •

एकादशोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER XI

अथातस्तिसैषणीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on three desires etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

इह खलु पुरुषेणानुप्पहसत्त्वबुद्धौचरणप्यग चेतसा हितमिच्छता लोके न सम्प्रहूयाचं तिस्र एषणाः;
पर्येष्टव्या भवन्ति । तद्यथा–प्राणैषणा, धनैषणा, परलोकैषणा चेति ॥३॥

A person, having underanged mind, intellect, potency and prowess and looking
to his well-being here and in the world hereafter, should pursue three desires such as
desire for life, desire for wealth and desire for the other world. [3]

आसां तु खलव्वेषणानां प्राणैषणां तावत् पूर्वतरमापद्येत । प्राणपरिरक्षणं हि सर्वभावानां
स्वस्थवृत्तान्नुष्ठिताः, आतुरस्य विकारप्रशमने प्रमाद:, तद्ग्भयमेतदुदू बहूयते च; तद्यभ्यमनुवर्तमान:
प्राणानुपालनान्तर्गानाद्यपालानाद्येतीति प्रथमैषणा व्याख्याता भवति ॥४॥

Out of all these desires, one should follow the desire to live first. Why? because
on departure of life, everything departs. Life has to be maintained by observance of the
code of conduct for the healthy and non-carelessness in alleviation of the disorders
in the diseased. Both these have been said (in part) and will be said further. Following
the aforesaid path, by maintaining the vital power, one achieves long life. Thus desire for
life is described. [4]
