72                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

द्विविधमेव खलु सर्वं सच्चासच्च; तस्य चतुर्विधा परीक्षा–आप्तोपदेशः; प्रत्यक्षम्, अनुमानं, युक्तिश्चेति ।।१७।।

All can be divided into two–existent (manifest) and non-existent (unmanifest).
Their examination is fourfold–authoritative statement, perception, inference and ra-
tionale. [17]

आप्तास्तावत्–
रजस्तमोम्यं निमुर्त्तास्तपोज्ञानबलेन ये । येषां त्रिकालमगलं ज्ञानमव्याहतं सदा ।।१८।।
आप्ता: शिष्टा विबुद्धास्ते तेषां वाक्यमसंश्ययम् । सत्यं, वद्ष्यन्ति ते कस्मादसत्यं नीरजस्तमाः ।।१९।।

Now the definition of the authority–those who are free from rajas and tamas and
endowed with strength of penance and knowledge, and whose knowledge is flawless,
always uncontradicted and true universally in past, present and future, are known as
āpta (who have acquired all the knowledge), śiṣta (expert in the discipline) and
vibuddha (enlightened); their word is free from doubt and is true because being de-
void of rajas and tamas how they can speak a lie. [18-19]

आत्मेन्द्रियमनोर्थानां सन्निकर्षात् प्रवर्तते । व्यक्ता तदात्वे या बुद्धिः: प्रत्यक्षं सा निरुच्यते ।।२०।।

The knowledge which arises by the contact of self, sense organs, mind and sense
objects, is explicit and only limited to the present is known as perception. [20]

प्रत्यक्षपूर्वं त्रिविधं त्रिकालं चानुमीयते । वह्निर्निगूवो भूमेय वर्षं गर्भश्चसर्गित् ।।२१।।
एवं व्यवसाययन्तीति बीजात्तु फलमनागतम् । दुर्द्क्या बीजतः: फलं जातमैवानुं सद्भरं बुधाः; ।।२२।।

Inference is based on prior perception. It is of three types and is related to the
three times. One can infer hidden fire from smoke, sexual intercourse from observing
the foetus and the future fruit from seed. By observing the bearing of similar fruit, the
learned infer the causation of seed. [21-22]

जलकर्षणबीजर्तुसंयोगात् सस्यसंभवः: । युक्तिः: षड्धातुसंयोगाद्नर्माः: संभवसत्या ।।२३।।
मथमानात्मन्दगधानमयोगाद्विद्र्शमः: । युक्तिभूता चतुष्पादाससंपद्व्याधिनिवर्हणी ।।२४।।

The growth of crops is observed from combination of water, ploughing, seed and
climate and so is the growth of foetus from combination of six dhātus. This is
(possible only because of) yukti–(proper and rational combination of all constituent
factors). Similar is the case of production of fire from the combination of one to
be churned, churning (process) and the churning stick. So is the arrangement of
four limbs (of therapeutics) which alleviates diseases if combined and used ration-
ally. [23-24]

बुद्धि: पश्यति या भावान् बहुकारणयोगजान् । युक्तिस्रिकाला सा ज्ञेया त्रिवर्गः; साध्यते यया ।।२५।।

(Thus yukti may be defined as follows):–

The knowledge which observes the things produced by combination of multiple
causative factors is yukti (rationale). It is true in the three times and is also helpful in
achieving the three categories (virtue, wealth and enjoyment). [25]
