XI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   73

एषा परीक्षा नास्त्यन्या यथा सर्वं परीक्ष्यते । परीक्ष्यं सदसच्चैव तया शान्तिं पुनर्भवे ।।२६।।

This is the (method and) instrument of examination and not any other, by which
all to be examined, existent and non-existent, is examined. By that examination re-
birth is proved. [26]

तथाचागमवर्येदे, यज्ञाज्ञोये कश्चिद्यविस्तरेण: परीक्षकैः: शिष्टानुमतैः: लोकानुष्टहृकच्छः: शाक्कव्देः
स चाओऽद्याताम्; आप्लागमादुपाप्त्यते स्वामतोययुनस्मार्द्धसाहऋछप्यवमायुतदपि; श्रेयस्कर:ायोगीति ।।२७।।

Authoritative scripture is the Veda or any other source of learning which is not in
disagreement with the Veda, is composed by investigating scholars, approved by
noble persons and intended for well-being of the people. This is the authoritative
scripture. From the authoritative scripture it is known that charity, penance, religious
sacrifice, truthfulness, non-violence and celibacy lead to worldly prospirity and lib-
eration. [27]

न चानतिवृत्ताससर्दोषाणामदोषैरवेत् तथर्षिभेर्यरुच्यते ।।२८।।

By those who are devoid of all defects (sages), in religious scriptures, free-
dom from rebirth is not mentioned for those who have not overcome their mental
defects. [28]

धर्मप्रापकोऽहितः व्यपातभरयागद्वर्णेलोमोहनैरम्भदिलमादयः । कर्मियिद्दवेल्तुपहतस्ववुद्धित्तूरुगे: पूर्वतनैहिःिच्-
दुचायवनुर्षृद्दयोपदेशः: पुनर्भव इति स्थाण्यतेपद्व्ते ।।२९।।

Rebirth has been established on perceiving with divine vision by early and
earlier great sages who were devoted to religious scriptures, are devoid of fear,
attachment, aversion, greed, confusion and conceit; devoted to ultimate know-
ledge, endowed with authoritative knowledge, having practical experience and
having movement of mind and intellect quite underanged. So one should decide
like that. [29]

प्रत्यक्षमपि चोपलभ्यते–मातापितुर्भ्यतिरिक्तगुणापच्त्यानि, तुल्यत्त्वस्पभावादर्पे वर्णस्वरलेरिदन्यमभ्यदिस्सास्षायो विशेषाः;
प्रजानरवकुलजन्म, दास्यैस्मर्यं, सुखदुःखायुषी, आयुषो वैषम्यं, इह कृतस्यार्पि च फलक्लवस्यवुगगक्तहःसास्वीदीनां
प्रसूति:, लम्झीयाति, कमेंसाहश्यं फलदिज्ञवः; मेधा काचित् काचित् कमंन्यमेधा, जातिस्मर्यम्–इष्टगगमयिच्लतहावशायिंः:,
संमदर्शने प्रियाप्रियत्वम् ।।३०।।

By perception also it is observed–progeny dissimilar to parents, difference in
complexion, voice, physiognomy, mind, intellect and fate inspite of the similar
genetic source, birth in a superior and inferior clan, slavery and sovereignty, happy
and unhappy life, inequality in life span, achievement of the result of the deed here,
inclination of untrained (babies) to weeping, breast-suckling, laughing, fear etc., ap-
pearance of marks (in body parts), difference in result inspite of similarity in action,

15 C.S.-I
