74                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

intellectual interest or otherwise in objects, memory of pervious birth showing the
coming back of the persons who had left the world, liking or otherwise in spite of
similar look. [30]

अत एवायुयीयते–यत् स्वकृतमपरिहार्यमवाभिवाति पौरर्वदेहकं दैवसंज्ञकमानुबन्धिकं कर्म, तस्वरूप्ल फलम्,
इहाइच्छत्नद्यचिष्णौति; फलतद्धःविचानुभरधते, फलं च केवलम् ।।३१।।

On the same basis, it is inferred that the deed of the self is unavoidable,
undestructible, related to previous body and continuing is known as 'daiva' (fate).
This (rebirth) is result of that (deed). Hereafter another (birth) would also be these
seed is inferred from fruit and vice versa. [31]

युक्तिश्चैयमा–षड्धातुसमुद्दायात्मर्भस्य, कर्तुकरणयोगात् क्रिया; कुतश्वच कर्मणः: फलं नाकृतम्; ता
नाभुयो(येथथसपिषानो; कर्मसदृयं फलं, नान्यस्यान्यत्कर्मणोम्पुतिः; इति युक्ति:: ।।३२।।

Rationale is also observed here–foetus is formed by combination of six dhātus, action is
due to conjunction of doer and instrument, result comes out of the action performed
and not of unperformed, there is no growth of sprout without seed. Result is in
consonance with action, no another (plant) grows from another seed. This is ration-
ale. [32]

एवं प्रबुध्धीहतुर्पसम्पदेहो पुनभेवे धर्मंज्ञसैयान्येषु; तद्यथा–गुर्ह्वस्म्मायामक्चं प्रवचनौर्थौ दारर्क्रियापयगायादंधादू
भृत्यमग्भरणे-्तिथिपुजापीं दानेऽनभिपेमर्भ तपस्वत्सुरायां देहेवाक्चण्सतो कर्मपम्बुक्लेधौ तदेविवावनौर्नांगखुपारस्मनग्रमगहिनानौ
कृर्तुं; तथा कुर्वीहूचव यशो लग्भले प्रेत्य स्वर्मम् । इति तृतीया परलोकैषणा व्याख्याता भवति ।।३३।।

Thus, re-birth having been established by (all) the four means of correct know-
ledge, one should attend to religious scriptures (and duties prescribed by them) such
as service of the teacher, study, performance of rites, marriage, reproduction,
supporting servants, intertaining guests, charity, refraining from desire of taking
(another's property), penance, refraining from envy, benevolent acts of body, speech
and mind, constant examination of body, sense organs, mind, objects, intellect and
self and also concentration of mind. One should also take up such other works which
are undespised by noble persons, heavenly and which promote livelihood. Acting so
one attains fame here and heaven hereafter. Thus the third desire for the other world
is explained. [33]

अय खलु त्रय उपस्तम्माः, त्रिविधं बलम्, त्रीणायतनानि, त्रयो रोगाः, त्रयो रोगमागर्राः, त्रिविधा भिषजः,
त्रिविधमौषधमिति ।।३४।।

There are three sub-pillars, three types of strength, three causes, three
diseases, three passages of diseases, three types of physicians and three types
of therapy. [34]
