76                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

the methods of eating except the quantity. Too much indulgence in very hot and
very cool objects and also in bath, massage, anointing etc. is excessive use of tactile
objects; total abstinence from these is negative use and application of tactile objects
such as hot and cold bath etc. without the usual order and also the touch of uneven
surface, injury, dirty objects, organisms etc. is perverted use of tactile object. [37]

तद्वैं स्पर्शनमिन्द्रियमिन्द्रियव्यापकं चेतः, स्पर्शनेन्द्रियाधिष्ठानेमेव च चेतः: तस्मादू सर्वेन्द्रियाणां
व्यापकस्पर्शकृतो यो भावविशेषः, सोऽसम्यगुपयुगा पञ्चविधविषयिविकल्पी भवत्यसात्म्येन्द्रियार्थसंयोगः, सात्म्यार्थी
हुपकारभ्तः ।।३८।।

Out of all these, tactile sense alone pervades all the sense organs and is
also associated inherently with mind so due to pervading of tactile sense, mind also
pervades. Thus the condition of all the sense organs produced by the overall tactile
sensation, because of being harmful, is known as unwholesome conjunction of sense
organs and its objects which is of five types each having three sub-divisions. The
objects which are accepted suitably are known as wholesome ones. [38]

कर्मं वाङ्नः:शरीरयृत्ति । तत वाङ्मनः:शरीरातिप्रवर्तितिर्योगः; सर्वशोऽप्रवृतिरयोगः; वेगसन्धारणोदीरणविषमविष-
मस्खलनप्रदानयग्रहणप्रहर्वनप्रदूयमनमनचश्रेर्यायामोपचारसेवनेग्वाहत्प्रजनादिः शरीरेगे मिथ्यायोगः; सूचकानृकालाप्नलकाविप्रिया-
कशाद्यसबधपर्नक्कराबासवसादिनैर्वाद्भिः मिथ्यायोगः; तथातितीर्थोऽयेरिका्मोमोमागेस्सेम्यादर्शनादिमनसो मिथ्यायोगः; गन्धपानमितिमात्रं
प्राणातियोगः; सर्वशोऽप्राणायनयोगः; पूति्वद्धैष्टमनन्बलिचयेष्षपयाचनङ्गधापेषपयादश्वन्तेन्द्रियावतनाविदयानामिथ्यायोगः; तथा
रसानामप्राश्नमतिमात्रं प्राश्नाथैव सम्यग्मनोगः; मिध्यायोगो राशिवार्तकम्बिधेयथैलैौपदेशाविभमनुप्रश्नं; अतितीक्ष्णोष्णगुरु-
तथासिगगाद्यवयायास्चौ स्पृश्यानामसेवनं विषपसनति च । शरतयातोष्यायोग्यादहमियोष्णदविदायग्व यथासमय मिथ्यायोगः ।।३९।।

Action is application of speech, mind and body. Too much application of these
is excessive use and their total non-application is negative use. Holding up or forcing
of urges, sleeping, falling and posturing in uneven places, abnormal posturing,
heating, pressing, obstructing breath and torturing is the perverted use of bodily
actions, words indicating betrayal, lying, untimely speech, quarrel, unliking,
irrelevance, indiscipline and harshness etc. come under the perverted uses of speech;
fear, grief, anger, greed, confusion, conceit, envy, wrong knowledge is the perverted
use of mind. [39]

संक्षेपेण चातिमात्रयोगश्च कर्म वाङ्नः:शरीरातमपपदेशं चत्स्यच मिथ्यायोगं विद्यात् ।।४०।।

In short, the harmful action of speech, mind and body which remain unsaid
except excessive and negative uses be taken as their perverted use. [40]

इति त्रिविधविकारणं त्रिविधस्य कर्म प्रज्ञापराद इति व्यवस्येत् ।।४१॥

This threefold action each having three subdivisions is taken as prajñāparādha
(intellectual error). [41]

शीतोष्णवर्लक्षणा:, पुनशैतागादिलक्षणाः: संवत्सर:, स कालः । तत्रातिस्वलक्षणः कालः कालातियोगो,
हीनस्वलक्षणः: (कालः) कालायोगो, यथास्वलक्षणविपरीतलक्षणस्तु (कालः) कालमिथ्यायोगः । कालः पुनः:
परिणाम इत्युच्यते ।।४२।।
