XI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   77

Time is year which again consists of winter, summer and rainy seasons with
(dominant) characters of cold, heat and rains respectively. If there is excess of the
specific character of time, it is called as excessive occurence, deficiency in these
characters denote the deficient occurence and time having characters opposite to its
own ones indicates the perverted occurence. Time is again known as consequence. [42]

इत्यसात्म्येन्द्रियार्थसंयोगः, प्रज्ञापराधः, परिणामो हेतुं त्रयो विकाराणाम्, समयोगाच्चातस्तु
प्रकृतिहेत्वो भवन्ति ।।४३।।

Thus, unwholesome conjunction of sense organs and objects, intellectual error
and consequence–these three with three sub-divisions each are causes of disorders while
conjoined in balanced combination are causes of normalcy. [43]

सर्वेमानेष भावानां भावाभावो नानर्य योगयोगेनादियोगयोगः, समुपलभ्येते; यथाऽव्य्चुतय्चुच्चयौ हि
भावाभावौ ।।४४।।

Existence and non-existence of all the objects are not met with without proper
and improper (excessive and perverted) uses respectively. Existence and
non-existence depend on the respective uses. [44]

अयो रोगा इति–निजागन्तुनसतः:. । तत्र शरीरदोषसमुत्थाः, आगन्तुभूतविषवायवद्ग्निसंप्रहारादिसमुत्थाः,
मानसः पुनरिष्टस्य लाभालल्लभाच्चनायिष्टोपलब्धेः ।।४५।।

There are three (types of) diseases–innate, exogenous and psychic. Innate is
that which arises due to bodily doṣas, exogenous is that which is caused by Bhūta
(spirits and organisms), poisoned air, fire, trauma etc. Psychic is that which is caused
by non-fulfilment of desires and facing of the undesired. [45]

तत्र बुद्धिमान् मानसव्याधिपरितेजानेिच्छ्रधा बुद्धिह्वानबवेध्यदैस्य धर्मायंकामानुष्ठानमनुसेवेत
हितानां चोपसेवने प्रवतितव्यं, न ह्यन्तेत्र लोके प्रबन्मेनाविना किंचिलिथमघते सुखं वा दुःखं वा; तस्मादेत्व्वानुचेत्–
तद्द्वानार्न् चोपसेवने प्रवतितव्यम्, आत्मदेशकुलकालबलशक्तिज्ञाने यथावच्छेति ।।४६।।

There, the wise person, inspite of being affects by mental disorder, should strive
for abstaining from unwholesome virtue, wealth and enjoyment and for pursuing the
wholesome ones. Normal happiness or unhappiness can occur in this world
without these three. Hence, this should be practised–effort to remain in touch with
the experts and to know properly the self, place, clan, time, strength and capacity. [46]

भवति चात्र–
मानसं प्रति भैषज्यं त्रिवर्गस्यान्ववेक्षणम् । तद्विद्यसेवा विज्ञानमात्मादीनां च सर्वश: ।।४७।।

Here is said–
