78                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

The therapy of psychic disorders is properly following the three categories (vir-
tue, wealth and enjoyment), company of experts and all around specific knowledge of
self etc. [47]

त्रयो रोगमार्गा इति–शाखा, मर्मासचयो च, कोष्ठश्च । तत्र शाखा रक्तादयो धातवस्त्वक्च, बाह्यो रोगमार्गः;
मर्माणि पुनर्वतस्त्वदयानि, अस्थियश्च सधिरो; तौयेषोमार्गोमोर्यस्त स्नायुकोष्ठानि; कोष्ठः: पुनर्यहस्ति वधरुयं
पुनर्चरुने महासोतः; शरीरमध्यं महानिखं, आपयोति मन्नायर्पानयत्ति चोच्यते, तदाहयांतर्गतो रोगमार्गः ।।४८।।

There are three passages of diseases–periphery, vital parts alongwith bonejoints
and belly. Periphery consists of dhātus–blood etc. and twak (skin including rasa dhātu
located in that). This is the external passage of disease. Vital parts are urinary blad-
der, heart, head etc., bone-joints are those where bones meet alongwith the bound
ligaments and tendons–this is the middle passage of disease. Belly is commonly down
as the great channel in the middle of the body extending from above downwards in-
cluding āmāśaya (stomach) and pakvāśaya (intestines). This is the internal passage of
the internal one. [48]

तत्र, गण्डीपदकपिकेव्ययौनिविक्ष्य्लामधिकमयकयत्ङ्धाद्यो विकारा बहिर्मागजा विसर्पश्वयथुगुल्मार्बुदाद्योधजाः,
शाखानुसारिणो भवन्ति रोगा; पक्षवातसादकम्पविश्लषाडाकुब्जनानौ चान्ये च संधिमर्मास्त्यासयायामर्मप्रहद्वयाः; शिरोह्दयवस्तिरोगादयश्च
मध्यमरोगमार्गजा भवन्ति रोगाः; ज्वरातिसारण्छ्द्यलसकैकासस्वासहिकानूकानो पाण्डूरोगच्वधमनोदावेरूस्तिरीवादयश्श
मध्यसरोगवेहुरोगमागाह्विद्गाह्यं वस्तिरगौयशच प्रमेहोर्ध्वं शाखाप्रायाणाबह्वियाङ्नामे कोष्ठाहबिष्कृते्षे्वात्मिभंभाग्मर्गे
चवयर्गन्यचे्योऽस्न्यावयेनाहै कोष्ठागुकारियो भवन्ति रोगाः ।।४९।।

There, diseases like glands, boils, diabetic boils, socrofula, warf, granuloma,
moles, leprosy and other skin diseases freckles etc. and erysipelas, oedema, gaseous
tumour, piles and abscess etc. occurring in the external passage are the diseases fol-
lowing the (passage of) periphery. Hemiplegia, stiffness of sides, convulsion, facial
paralysis, wasting, tuberculosis, pain in bone-joints, prolapse of rectum etc. and also
the diseases of head, heart and urinary bladder are the diseases following the middle
passage. Diarrhoea, vomiting, alasaka, fever, cholera, cough, dyspnoea, hiccup, hard-
ness of bowels, abdominal enlargement, spleen enlargement etc. along with erysip-
elas, oedema, gaseous tumour, piles, abscess etc. occurring in internal passage are the
diseases which follow the (passage of) belly. [49]

त्रिविधा भिषज इति–
भिषक्छद्मचराः; सन्ति सन्त्येके सिद्धसाधिताः । सन्ति वैद्यगुणैर्युक्तास्त्रिविधा भिषजो भुवि ।।५०।।
वैद्यभाण्डौषधैर्युक्तैः: पुरतैः: पल्लवसैर्वलोऽपि । लभ्यते वे भिषक्छब्दमहरन्तराह्र प्रतिष्ठयकम्; ।।५१।।
श्रीज्ञोज्ञानविज्ञानो व्यपदेशप्रतिछ्धन् । वैद्यश्चदं लभन्ते ने हेयास्ते सिद्धसाधिताः ।।५२।।
प्रयोग्ज्ञानविज्ञानसिद्धिद्धिः: सुखदायाः: । जीवितःभिसरासतै स्युर्वेद्यास् त्यथवच्चियतानिति ।।५३।।

There are three types of physicians–fraudulent, those imitating the accomplished
ones and other endowed with physician's qualities. Those who by virtue of having
