80                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

स ब्राण्तममानसाख वालत्वच्चेति जीवितम् । गोधा लाङ्गलकद्धेबाकुरुष्पमाणा बलीयसा ।।६२।।
तस्माह् रोगाणूोऽय रोगेणु तरुणेषु वा । भेषज्ञः: प्रतिकुर्वीत च इच्छेद्ु सुखमात्मनः ।।६३।।

Here are the verses–

The wise, in case of disease, gets relief by external or internal or surgical meas-
ures, the childish, due to confusion or carelessness do not know about the emerging
disorder in early stage as fools about the enemy. The disorder, though having a minute
start, advances afterwards and gradually becoming deep-rooted takes away the strength
and life of the foolish one. The fool does not realise till he is afflicted and only there-
after he thinks for controlling the disease. He collects son, wife and kins and
requests them to bring some physician even at the cost of his entire possession, but
who can be able to save him, the devoid of life, weak, afflicted, emaciated, anxious
and with the sense organs waned away. Thus not finding a saviour that fool leaves his
life like an iguana with her tail bound and dragged by a strong person. Hence one,
who wishes happiness, should counteract with medicines before the disorder is pro-
duced or when it is newly risen. [56-63]

तत्र श्लोकाः–
एषणाः: समुपसम्भा बलं कारणमामयाः । तिसैषणीये मार्गाश्च भिषजो भेषजानि च ।।६४।।
त्रिवेरगाठो समुदिटः: कृष्णाजेयेन धीमता । भावा, भावेष्ववस्थेन येनू सर्वं प्रतिष्ठितम् ।।६५।।

Now the summing up verses–

Desires, sub-pillars, strength, causes, disorders, passages, physicians and thera-
pies these eight things have been described as three-fold by Kṛṣṇātreya, who was
and detached from worldly things. On these all is based. [64-65]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्ने चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने तिसैषणीयो नामैकादशोऽध्यायः ॥११॥

Thus ends the eleventh chapter on three desires etc. in Ślokasthāna in the
treatise compiled by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (11).

                                  •

द्वादशोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER XII

अथातो वातकलाकलीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on merits and demerits of vāta etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]
