XII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   81

वातकलाकलाज्ञानमधिकृत्य परस्परमतानि जिज्ञासमानाः; समुपविश्य महर्षयः; प्रपच्छुरन्योऽन्यं–किंगुणो
वायुः, किमस्य प्रकोपणं, उपशमनानि वाऽस्य कानि, कथं चैनमस्तुप्तगवनवस्तितमस्थानमास्थापनमस्य प्रकोपणाशा
मनानि प्रकोपयन्ति प्रशमयन्ति वा, कानि चास्य कुपिताकुपितस्य शरीराशरीरचरस्य शरीरेषु चरतः कमर्ाणि बहिः:शरीरेभ्यो
चेति ।।३।।

In reference to the knowledge about merits and demerits of vāta, the sages, with
a view to knowing one another's view point put forth the questions for mutual discus-
sion–what are the properties of vāyu ? What is the cause of its vitiation or pacifica-
tion ? How, without coming in contact of vāyu, which is formless and unstable, the
vitiating or pacifying agents perform their actions ? What are its functions in the body
or outside in case of its vitiation or normalcy ? [3]

अतोवाच कुशः: सांकृत्यायनः–रक्षलघुशीतदारुणखरविशदाः: षदिमे वातगुणा भवन्ति ।।४।।

On this said Kuśa Sāṅkṛtyāyana–roughness, lightness, coldness, hardness, coarse-
ness and non-sliminess–these are the six properties of vāta. [4]

तचुक्तां वावच कुमारशिरा भरद्वाज उवाच–एवमेतद्या भगवानाह, एत एव वातगुणा भवन्ति, स लेबेदगुर्णेरेबर्द्धा-
हेर्व्यद्वैर्वा कमर्भिश्यत्तगायैमैनूर्जि, प्रकोपणसयद्वि, सपानगुणामयासे ये धालर्ल बुद्धिकारणानि ।।५।।

Having heard this statement, Kumāraśirā Bharadwāja said–you have said cor-
rectly, these are the properties of vāta. That vāyu gets vitiated due to prolonged use of
measures having similar properties, substances and effects because of similarity of
similar properties is the cause of increase in dhātus. [5]

तचुक्ता वायच काहौकायनो बाह्निकभिषमुवाच–एयमेतद्या भगवानाह, हेतान्येव वातप्रकोपणानि भवन्ति; अतो
विपरीतानि वातस्य प्रशमनानि भवन्ति, प्रकोपणानिवद्धैर्वि हि धातुनां प्रशम्यकारणानि ।।६।।

Having heard this, Kāṅkāyana, the physician from Bāhlīka, said–this is as you
said, those very factors are the vitiating causes of vāta and those having opposite
properties are the pacifying factors as the opposite to vitiating (factors) is the cause
of pacification of dhātus. [6]

तचुक्ता वावच बडिशो धामार्गव उवाच–एवमेतद्या भगवानाह, एतान्येव वातप्रकोपणप्रशमनानि भवन्ति । यथा
ह्ोनस्तद्गुणसमातरुक्तितेर्नानामनुपमामुपायैरेव प्रकोपणानि , प्रशमनानि वा, तथा अनुप्रवच्ायाः–वातप्रकोप्णानि खलु
रक्षलघुशीतदार्णुग्वव्यदेर्व्यैरितेरीसैर्वा शरीरेणनूः, तथा विरुद्धेपहियाव्यैद्र्वैर्वमायेरोदितैसप्रिविवाणि साधयन्ति, प्रकोपयाणन्ये,
वातप्रशमनानि पुनः: स्निग्धगुरुग्रस्थमलम्तगुणवदुपिवामनुगर्तायानि शरीराणाम्, तथाविधेश्व शरीरेषु वायुसयमप्रन्तर्न्र-
प्रशमनमपयद्वते ।।७।।

Having heard this, Baḍiśa Dhāmārgava said–you have said correctly, sir,
these are verily the factors vitiating or pacifying vāta. Now I am explaining how
these (factors) without coming in contact with the formless and unstable vāta
exert their vitiating or pacifying action. The vāta-vitiating factors produce roughness,

16 C.S.-I
