84                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

Vāryovida replied–If a physician does not realise the (importance of) vāyu which
is too strong, too rough, too quick-acting and causing emergent conditions, how
would he be able to protect further aggravation of suddenly vitiated vāyu, inspite of
best efforts, or prior to this to prevent the emergency. The sincere regard to vāyu,
too, is conductive to health, improvement of strength and complexion, valour,
development, improvement of knowledge and maximum expanse of life-span. [10]

मरीचिरुवाच–अग्निरेव शरीरे पित्तान्तर्गतः; कुपिताकुपितः: शुभाशुभानि करोति; तद्था–पक्तिमपक्ति दर्शनादर्शनं
मात्रामात्रत्वमृष्णान, प्रकृतिविकृतिवर्ण शौर्य भयं क्रोधं हर्षं मोहं प्रसादमित्येवमादीनि चापराणि द्वन्द्वानीति ।।११।।

Marīci said–Agni itself which is included in pitta in the body is responsible for
producing wholesome or unwholesome effects in vitiated or unvitiated states respec-
tively. Such as–digestion-indigestion, vision-nonvision, (proper) degree or otherwise
of heat, normal-abnormal complexion, prowess-fear, anger-exhilaration, confusion
and clarity and other such duals. [11]

तच्चुक्ता मरीचिमध: काप्य उवाच–सोम एव शरीरे श्लेष्मान्तर्गतः कुपिताकुपितः शुभाशुभानि करोति;
तद्था–दार्ढ्यं शैथिल्यमुपचयं कार्श्यमुत्साहमालस्यं वृषतां क्लीवतां ज्ञानमज्ञानं बुद्धि मोहमेवमादीनि चापराणि
इन्द्रानीति ।।१२।।

Having heard the statement of Marīci, Kāpya said–It is soma which included in
kapha gives rise to good or bad effects in vitiated or unvitiated condition respec-
tively, such as firmness-laxity, development-emaciation, enthusiasm and idleness,
potency-impotency, knowledge-ignorance, understanding-confusion and other such
duals. [12]

तचुक्ता काप्यावचो भगवान् पुनर्वसुरात्रेय उवाच–सर्व एव भवन्तः सम्यगाहूरन्यत्रेकान्तिकाभिनिवेशात्; सर्व एव खलु
वातपित्तश्लेष्माणः: प्रकृतिभूताः; पुरुषमव्याहावीदर्जि बलवर्णसुखोपचयबलायुषा महतोपपादयन्ति सम्ययोगाद्यथा धर्मार्थकामाः
इव नि:श्रेयसेन महता पुरुषमिह चामुष्मिश्च लोके; विकृतास्त्वेनं महता विपयैयेणोपपादयन्ति महतवखव इव
विकृतिभागत्रा लोकमयृत्ुमेनोपातकालं इति ।।१३।।

Having heard the statement of Kāpya, Lord Punarvasu Ātreya said–All of you
have said correctly except non-exclusive statement. All vāta, pitta and kapha, in nor-
mal state, endow the person with unaffected sense organs, strength, complexion and
happiness and also with a long life-span as virtue, wealth and enjoyment pursued
properly endow the person with great well-being here and in the world hereafter; on
the contrary, in abnormal state, they give rise to severe abnormalities as three seasons,
when abnormal, produce harmful effects in the world particularly at the time of final
destruction. [13]
