86                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

किंयोनयः: कति स्नेहाः: के च केनुपयोगिनः; पृथक् । कालानुपाने का कस्य कति काड्क्षा विचारणा ।।४।।
कति मात्राः: कर्माणि: का च केनुपदिष्यते । अग्ने संशेमेने वैव स्नेहो को युत्तिमिच्छति ।।५।।
स्नेहः: के के च के निम्नस्थानातिस्निग्धलक्षणम् । किं पानात् प्रथम भोजी जीर्ण किंच हितिहितम् ।।६।।
के सद्वूस्वस्तमी: का व्यापदः: सिद्धग्रह्मा : स्नेहसंशोधनस्य का: ।
विचारणा: केषु योजिया केन वा प्रभो । स्नेहस्योपायशिनं ज्ञात्निच्छामि मेदितुम् ।।७।।

What are the sources? How many are the uncting substances? How are the prop-
erties of these substances separately and also their time and vehicle? How many and
what are the unction media? How many doses and in what measure are prescribed and
for whom ? what uncting substance is suitable for whom ? What are the maximum and
minimum durations of unction? Who are fit for unction and who are otherwise? What
are the symptoms of well-uncted, non-uncted and excessively uncted? What is beneficial
before, after intake and after digestion of uncting substance? Who are those having
soft, medium and hard bowel? What are the complications and their treatment? What
is to be done during intake of simple as well as evacuative unction? To whom and by
what method the uncting media should be administered? I want to have knowledge of unction.
O Lord heaving immeasurable intelligence. [4-8]

अथ तत्संग्रह्तेसा प्रत्युवाच पुनर्वसु: । स्नेहानां द्विविधा सोम्य योनिस्ज्जङ्गमा ।।९।।

Then, punarvasu, the remover of his doubt, replied–there are two types of the
sources of uncting substances–vegetable and animal, O gentle one! [9]

तिलाः; प्रियालाभिनुवाः; बिभीतकाद्धदाक्ष्तिकाम्बुवीरकमारुषयायीः; ।
कुसुम्भविलकालुकाम्ुलकातसीनिकोबकाक्षोडकरञ्जशिग्रवः: ।।१०।।
स्नेहाश्शक्षायानुक्तसंखिनस्वा स्युनःृषमं मत्स्यनिगुह्ःयं सपक्षिणःः ।
तेषां दरिवशृष्टम्हो यसा स्नेहेग मञ्जा च तरयोरथिषे ।।११।।

Tila, priyāla, abhiṣuka, bibbītaka, dantī, harītakī, eraṇḍa, madhūka sarṣapa,
kusumbha, bilwa, āruka, mūlaka, atasī, nikocaka, akṣoda, karañja and śigru–these are
vegetable sources of uncting substance. As regards the animal source, fish, fish, quad-
ruped animals and birds come under this group. their curd, milk, ghee, meat, muscle-fat
and (bone) marrow are used as uncting substance. [10-11]

सर्वेषां स्नेहजातानां तिलतैलं विशिष्यते । बलार्थं स्नेहार्थे च चातुष्कैमयैरुङ्ज्जब विरेचने ।।१२।।
(कटुकैलैमैत्ये वातश्लेम्हरं गुरु । कषायलमृदुतिक्तेजः: योजितं पित्तसंशितमि) ।१।।

Of all the oils, tila oil is the best one for strength and unction while castor oil is
best for purgation. [12]

(Castor oil is pungent, hot, heavy and alleviates vāta and kapha. It also alleviates
pitta if combined with (drugs of) astringent, sweet and bitter groups.) [1]

सर्पिस्तैलं वसा मज्जा सर्वस्नेहोत्तमा मताः । एतु चैवोत्तरं सर्पिः: संस्कारस्यानुवर्त्तनात् ।।१३।।
