XIII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   87

Ghee, oil, fat and marrow–these are regarded as the best ones among all the
uncting substances. Among them too, ghee is the best one because of the continuance
of (the properties of) processing. [13]

घृतं तैलमवसारं रसघुष्णातं हितम् । निवापगौ शूकं मृदुकरं स्वरवर्णोप्रसादनम् ।।१४।।

Ghee alleviates pitta and vāta, is beneficial for rasa, semen and ojas, cooling
softening and improves voice and complexion. [14]

मार्त्क्ष्र्य न च श्लेष्मवर्षनं बलवर्षनम् । त्वच्योमुख्यं स्थिर्यकरं तैलं योनिविशोधनम् ।।१५।।

Oil alleviates vāta but, at the same time, does not aggravate kapha. It promotes
strength, is beneficial for skin, hair, provides firmness and cleans female genital pas-
sage. [15]

विभेदभ्ग्रसुक्तेषु भग्रनिकुटिणासु च । पीणनोपेषवसे गते अध्ययामय चेष्ठ रसा ।।१६।।

Muscle-fat is useful in perforation, fracture, joint, prolapse of uterus, ear-ache,
and headache. It is also useful for enhancing virility, voice and firm body, after prac-
tice physical exercise. [16]

बलशुक्ररसश्लेमेमेदोमज्ज्ञवाक्क्षीनिचव्र: । मज्जा विशेष्योऽस्थयं च बलकृत् स्नेहे: हितः ।।१७।।

Marrow promotes strength, semen, rasa, kapha, meda (fat) and majjā (marrow).
It is particularly strength-giving to bones and is useful for unction. [17]

सर्पिः: शरदि पातव्यं तसा : ज्ञा च माघवे । तैलं प्रावृसि कोणौनेर्ते स्नेहे विभेजयेत् ।।१८।।

Ghee should be taken in autumn, fat and marrow in spring and oil in early rains.
One should not take uncting substance in weather too hot or too cold. [18]

वातपित्ताधिके राजाद्यौ स्न् पीयते । श्लेष्माधिको कोपौव दिवा शीते पिवेचवालाशी सपीदित ।।१९।।

One, having aggravation of vāta and pitta and also in summer, should take unc-
tion in night. That with aggravated kapha and in winter should take it in day when the
sun is clear. [19]

अत्युष्णो मा दिवा पीतो वातपित्ताधिकेन वा । मूर्च्छा पिपासामासुनादं कामलां वा समीरयेत् ।।२०।।
शीते रात्री पिबनू स्नेह तु: श्लेष्माधिकोऽपि वा । आनाहमलयं शूलं पाण्डुतां वा समच्छति ।।२१।।

(If this instruction is not followed) one, having aggravation of vāta and pitta
or in very hot season, takes unction in day, he becomes afflicted with fainting, thirst,
insanity or jaundice. Similarly, if the person having dominant kapha or in cold season
takes it in night, he gets hardness of bowels, colic pain or anaemia. [20-21]

जलग्ुष्णो धृते पीते मण्डेऽनुष्णोदके मण्डः । स्याद् सर्वेषुष्णवारिवा ।।२२।।

After taking ghee one should drink hot water. Similarly, he should take
soup after oil, maṇḍa (boiled rice water) after fat and marrow or in all cases hot
water. [22]

ओदनाहु विलेपी च रसो मांस यवा दधि । यवागू: सूप्शाकाहु च शुक्र: काम्बलिक: खडः ।।२३।।
