XIII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   89

passages, promotes strength and refreshes the body, sense organs and mind. Those
who are suffering from eruptions, boils, pimples, itching, eczema, leprosy, urinary
disorders, and vātarakta; do not take to much food, have soft bowels and average
strength should take the medium dose. This dose is hardly liable to complication,
does not cause too much weakness, uncts well, ease. This is used for evacuation. The
old, the children, the delicate, the ease-living, those for which the empty bowels are
not beneficial, have low digestion and are suffering from chronic fever, diarrohea and
cough, have poor strength, should take the dose of unction. This is easy in pre-
cautions, is unctuous and nourishing, promotes virility and strength, is free from com-
plication and combines for long. [29-40]

वातपित्तप्रकृतयो यान्तिधीयाधिकारिण: । चक्षुःकामाः: क्षताः: क्षीणा वृद्धा बालास्तत्यबला: ।।४१।।
आयुःसुक्रबलाकामा प्रजाकामाश्च मानवाः: श्रमानवृत्तिऔभेदोदभैदारिनिीनः ये ।।४२।।
दीर्घेकीवा:स्मृतिमेधाभिभुक्तिधेव्ववर्धिनः । पिबेषु सर्पिरतायां द्राहर्श्वमेष्जवायिि: ।।४३।।

Those having constitution predominant in vāta and pitta, afflicted with disorders
of vāta and pitta, desirous of good vision, injured, wasted, the old, the children, women,
desiring long life, strength, complexion, voice, nourishment, progeny, delicacy or bril-
liance, immunity, memory, intellect, appetite and strong sense organs, and injured
with burns, weapons, poisons and fire should take ghee. [41-43]

प्रथुजघनमेदः:कफ्ालसस्यूलगतोहरा: । वातव्याधिपरीतस्या वातकलकत्तवह्धौ ये ।।४४।।
बलं तनुषु लघुतां दृढ्तां स्निरग्धरक्षताम् । स्निग्धमश्लधसुजातत्वच्हा यो वे काड्क्षनि देहिनः ।।४५।।
कमिक्ोष्ठा: कुरुकोष्णानत्वा नाङ्जीभिरितिरास: । पिवेक्षुक्ल्यानत्वा तैलं स्नेहाति वामिषाङ्ज ये ।।४६।।

Those having increased kapha and fat, with moving and plumpy neck and abdo-
men, afflicted with vātika disorders, having vātika constitution, desirous of strength,
sliminess, lightness, firmness, stability of body parts and unctuous, smooth and thin
skin; afflicted with worms and sinuses, having hard bowels and habituated to oil should
take oil in cold season. [44-46]

वातातपस्ुधा ये च कण्ठा भागुयक्तियिः । संशुष्करोषेधितपिः: नित्भोलिमचमेदसः ।।४७।।
अस्थिसन्धिसरास्नायुम्नकोष्ठात्मनकः: । बलवान्मास्तो येषां खानि सुम्बर्ण्ण तिष्ठति ।।४८।।
मक्ष्म्बिकत्र्वलं येषं वसासात्म्याञ्च ये नराः; । तेषा स्नेहितमध्ये बिरि्शा सापायौ विधीयते ।।४९।।

Those who are tolerant of winds and the sun, are rough, emaciated due to weight-
carrying and travelling on foot, one having semen and blood dried up, and kapha
and fat absorbed, are afflicted with servere disorders of bone joints, veins, ligaments,
vital parts and belly, have strong vāta having covered all the passages, with excellent
power of digestion and are accustomed to muscle-fat should take it when they require
unction. [47-49]

17 C.S.-I
