92                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

तत्राप्ुल्लेखेने शस्तं स्वेदः: कालप्रतीक्षणम् । प्रति प्रति व्याधिवशं बुद्धा साक्ससेमेव वा ।।७७।।
तक्रारिष्ठप्रयोगश्च रूक्षाणां विकपानाम् । सूत्राणं विकाश्रिमेथजान् स्नेहव्यापदि भेषजम् ।।७८।।

In persons with intestines having excessive pitta and strong digestive power, the
uncting substance taken is reduced to ashes in a very short time by the power of di-
gestive fire. The fire fanned by unction and being powerful having consumed the
dose of the unction, affects the ojas and gives rise to complicated thirst. Even much
heavy food is not able to pacify the fire (fuelled and) intensified with unction. If the
person does not get cold water, he is burnt like a serpent lying within a room by his
own poison-fire.

If there arises thirst on indigestion of the unction, the physician should induce
vomiting. Again the patient should drink cold water and rough food and then vomit.
Ghee alone should not be taken in (excess of) pitta particularly associated with āma
because it produces colour (jaundice) in the whole body and having destroyed con-
sciousness kills (the patient).

Drowsiness, nausea, hardness of bowels, fever, stiffness, loss of consciousness,
skin disorders, itching, paleness, oedema, piles, anorexia, thirst, abdominal enlarge-
ment, disorders of grahaṇī, feeling of cold, obstruction in voice, colic pain and disor-
ders of āma–these arise due to improper unction.

There, frequent vomiting, fomentation, watching for a while and purgation are
recommended according to severity of disease. The use of buttermilk, ariṣṭa (a fer-
mented preparation) rough food and drinks, urines and three fruits is the remedy for
complications due to unction (or hyperlipidaemia). [70-78]

अकाले चातिमात्रेय मात्र्या न च योजितः । स्नेहो मिथ्योपचारेमक स्यान्षदातिसेविनि: ।।७९।।

Unction, if administered untimely, in unsuitable form, in improper or excessive
doses and with improper management may create complications. [79]

स्नेहान् प्रक्ष्यान् जन्तुविरेऽपराः: पिवेत् । स्नेहद्रद्व्ब्युयुक्ष्र च अद्धं भुक्त्वा रसौदनम् ।।८०।।

Purgative should be administered three days after unction–during this interval,
the patient should take unctuous liquid and hot cooked rice with meat soup. [80]

एक्ाहोपरश्वस्वहुद्भुयुर्तं पिवेत् । स्नात्वसंशेेयूेनेयोर्वि वृत्ति: स्नेहो विरिक्षा । ।।८१।।

Emetic should be administered after one day's interval with the similar food. [81]

The management in case of non-evacuative unction should be like that in
purgative. [81]

स्नेहाद्धु: स्नेहनिषयं मुदुकोष्ठाध्ि येते : । क्लेद्वाशस्र मद्धोनम्बद्धित्र विसारह: ।।८२।।
लावान्तितिस्षाष्द्ष्द्षाहरीतेत्क्ुद्धपश्ष्ल्ज्ब्ध्धर: । गव्ण्वद्धागत्वलयासाद्व रसा: स्थयु: स्नेहूने हितः: ।।८३।।
सवक्ोलकुलल्ण्वाद्ध स्नेह: सगुडदारुषि: । दा्डिमं द्धधि सजलयो रसस्षयो्द्धगसम्ब: ।।८४।।
