XIII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   93

स्नेहचनं तिलाः: पूर्वं सस्नेहफाणितः । कूरारराः बहुस्नेहतेलकामलिकास्वा ।।८५।।
फाणितं मुद्धवेरै च तैलं च तुरवा सह । पिवेद्बहो भृणौनसैरीणौर्द्व्र्बीद्धा भोजनम् ।।८६।।
तैलं सरामा मधकं वसा मञ्जथमेव वा । पिवदु सक्तानिमे ज्योतिं स्नेहार्थे वातिकः: ।।८७।।
धारोष्णं वा पयस्नर्ग्ं पीताबू सशेर्करा वा । नरः: स्नेहार्थं पीत्वा वर रसं स्म्यगू सर्पिषा ।।८८।।
पाद्धाप्रसृतिकौ पीत्ब् पायसो माणिपष्केयी । औरितिक्षासमे संशितु ज्ोह्ज्ष ज्र्ज्ज्द्ध एए्द्ज्ल्क्ज ।।८९।।
सपिर्डलैन्क्ल्द्वासाय्र अप्ज्द्व्ज्द्व्ष्ज्द्ध्द्व्ज्द्व्ज्बुि ।।८९।।
(श्रोकौटे च् राय: निर्दिभ्ध्द्व्ज्द्व्द्व: द्व्द्व्द्ध; ्जे्द्व्ज्ज्द्व्ज्द्व्द्व: शोह्ज्ज्द्ध्द्व्ज्द्ध;शदितीदेर्तकम्द्न ।।१।।)

In case of those having aversion to uncting substance, habit of unction, soft
bowels, intolerance for physical strain and habit of drinking, uncting media are rec-
ommended.

The meat soup of common-quail, black partridge, peacock, swan, pig, cock,
cow, goat, wild sheep and fish are useful in unction. Barley, jujube, kulattha (horse
gram), uncting substances mixed with jaggery and sugar, pomegranates, curd and
the three pungent (long pepper, ginger and black pepper)–these are combined with
the above soup. The sesamum seeds if taken alongwith the uncting substance and
phāṇita (a sort of jaggery) before meals produce good unction. Similar is the effect
of kṛṣarā (a dietary preparation of rice and pulse) with plenty of uncting substance
and of tilakāmbalika (a dietary preparation).

One, who is afflicted with roughness, should take phāṇita (a sort of jaggery),
ginger and oil together with wine. After it is digested he should take meal alongwith
minced meat. The person having predominance of vāta is uncted by taking oil, fat or
marrow alongwith clear wine or milk mixed with phāṇita (a sort of jaggery). A person
is uncted by taking fresh warm milk mixed with the uncting substance and sugar or
the upper fatty layer of curd together with phāṇita. The liquid gruel known as
pāñcaprasṛtikī and pāyasa (rice cooked with milk) mixed with black gram, cooked
in milk and added with plenty of the uncting substance uncts the person in a
short time. Pāñcaprasṛtikī gruel is prepared from five items (ghee, oil, fat, marrow
and rice) each in prasṛta (80 gm.) quantity. This gruel should be taken by one desiring
unction. [82-90]

(The soup of pork added with the uncting substance, ghee and salt uncts a person
in no time when taken twice a day (?).

ग्राम्यानूपौदकं मांसं गुडं दधि पयस्तिलम् । कुष्ठी शोषी प्रमेही व स्नेहने न प्रयोजयेत् ।।१९।।
स्नेहैचाद् तानू निरग्धैः; स्नेह्द्धेविकारिषिः । पिप्पलोभिर्हरीत्क्ष्णा वा फलप्रस्तौलेक्षण्य फलैरतथा ।।१९।।
द्राङ्ालसकपुषाधंक दथ्ना चालमेन साधयेत् । व्योषेभ्यां चिषक्ष स्नेहं पीत्वा स्निग्धं तं रोहम् ।।९२।।
यवकोलकुलत्थानां स्नेहाम: संगुडुश्शराः । द्धरः; सुरा द्धि । क्षीरसर्पिः: तत् सिद्धं स्नेहनीर्ये पुतोत्तमम् ।।९४।।
