94                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

One suffering from leprosy, oedema and prameha should not use meat of domestic,
marshy and aquatic animals, jaggery, curd, milk and sesamum seeds. They,
according to their condition, should be uncted with the innocuous uncting substances
cooked with long pepper, harītakī or three fruits or with soup of grapes and āmalaka
and sour curd. The uncting substance cooked with the three purgants may also be
administered as intake for unction. Decoction of barley, jujube, kulattha, alkali, urine,
curd, ghee extracted from milk–all these cooked together make an excellent uncting
ghee. [91-94]

तैलमज्जवसासर्पिर्जजुफलैस्तरैः । योनिशुक्ष्यदोष्षेपु साधयित्वा प्रयोजयेत् ।।९५।।

In disorders of female genital tract and semen; oil, marrow, fat, ghee cooked
alongwith decoction of jujube and three fruits may be cooked. [95]

गुह्यास्ण्व्यथा यथा वस्त्रं प्रसक्षत्यार्द्ध तत्क्षया । यथास्थि जीणीति स्नेहो स्नेहितः शरीरे चायिकाः ।।९६।।
यथाऽऽज्जनो मुद्धिभस्ध्केद बावरा अलम् । स्तति जीणे ज स्नेहसा त्वरितस्तिरकः: ।।९७।।

As a cloth absorbs water and releases the excess, the uncting substance is as-
similated according to digestive power and the excess is thrown out. But when the
uncting substance is taken at once (without sufficient interval) it goes out entirely
(without effecting the body) like water poured over an earthen mass quickly flows
out without moistening it. [96-97]

लवणोष्ष्धेहमध्ध्व: स्नेहश्चानु प्रवच्यते । तक्रद्धमिव्न्यवकर्ब्द्व च सूक्ष्मोष्ष्श व्यवाद्य वा ।।९८।।

Uncting substance added with salt uncts the person in no time because the
salt is fluid-absorbing, non-rough, piercing, hot and is quickly absorbed. [98]

स्नेह्ये प्रथमतः: स्तेद्ध्द्वस्ज्द्तरं । स्तेद्धोदगपत्र संशोधनम्धवेत् ।।९९।।

First of all unction and then fomentation should be used. After having passed
through both these measures, one should be given either of the evacuatives–purgative
or emetic. [99]

तत्र ्ष्ोकाः–
स्नेहाः: स्नेहविधिः: कुलवस्द्ज्र्यपेसिद्धिविदद्ज्द्ब । पंजी्द्द्व्द्व्द्ज भगवबा द्व्ज्ायतद्ज चान्द्धमािगम्द्व ।।१००।।

Now (the summing up) verses–

The uncting substances, method of unction, management of its complications
alongwith medicament–these have been explained by the son of Candrabhāgā (Atri)
according to the questions (raised). [100]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने स्नेहाध्यायो
नाम त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः ॥१३॥

Thus ends the thirteenth chapter in Ślokasthāna in the treatise
composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (13).

                                  •
