XIV]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   97

and shanks, swelling, khallī (contracture), conditions of āma, cold, shivering,
vātakaṇṭaka, contraction, extension, pain, stiffness, heaviness and numbness in
organs and general disorders–in these conditions fomentation is beneficial. [20-24]

तिलमाषकुलत्यानांगृहीतस्वदस्तथा । पायसैः; कृसरै: मांसः; पिण्डस्वेदेन योजयेत् ।।२५।।
गोधालाग्नातकाणाधिक्यः: सतुपीवी ं पिप्ककक्षायैरुषुणस्तस्यपि : ।।२६।।
श्लेष्मविन्ने: स्वेदयेत् पूर्वमिनाहाव हिगाद्धा । द्वालाशशिले शस्यन्ते यथाविगै प्रशस्यवै ।।२७।।

Piṇḍasweda (bolus fomentation) should be applied with sesamum, blackgram,
horse gram, sour preparations (vinegar etc.), ghee, oil, meat, cooked rice, rice cooked
with milk, kṛśarā (preparation of rice and pulse) and meat. This is also administered
with faeces of cow, ass, camel, pig and horse, husked barley, sand, dust, stone pieces,
dried cow dung and iron balls. The former may be prescribed for those suffering from
the disorders of vāta, while the latter for the kaphaja disorders. These articles should
be applied with consideration of necessity. [25-27]

भृगृहेपु च जेन्ताकेषु महाभेषेषु रत्नक्द्ज्द्बौ । विद्यमादम्जर्द्जौकुलस्वमयद्धम् । तिषद्धा रद्धद्धोऽज्ज्जुषस्द्जश्जि ।।२८।।

Having been massaged well one is fomented comfortably in ground chambers,
jentāka and hot underground cellars which are heated with smokeless charcoal. [28]

ग्राम्द्जानूपौद्जक्द्जौ मांसं नाद्ज्द्बीद्जिक्द्जिविशेषयौ क्द्जौ । स्जेहाशेकोवक्द्जिमेषा नाद्जौद्जिविक्द्जिज्द्जुजिनिनि्ज्द्ज्द्ज्द्जिज्जि ।।२९।।
वारुण्द्जिमुक्द्जिनद्जिमिज्द्जिवद्ज ्बिज्द्जष्द्जि्जौ । द्जिवप्द्जिशिशिक्जिशि्द्जिक्जिश्द्ज्द्जिज्जिश्जुजिज्द्जिशिजिशि ।।३०।।
वर्द्जौद्जि्द्जिज्द्जक्द्ज्द्जिश्द्जिराद्जि्जक्द्जिवद्धैजिजिशिजि र् । बद्जिवदोवीज्द्जौद्जश्द्जिविजिनिजजि : शि्द्जजिनि्द्जजश्जिजिज्द्जि्द्जि : ।।३१।।
शोम्द्जिजि्द्जिविशिगि्द्जिविज्जौ्द्जिज्जिविज्जि : क्द्जिश्जिशि : शिजिजिनिजिनिज्द्जिजजिज्जिजि्द्जि्द्जिज्जिजिजि : ।।३२।।
मूर्द्जिनिक्द्जिशि्द्जिज्ज्द्जिजि्द्जिशिजि्द्जि : शिजिज्द्ज्द्जिजि्द्जिजि : जिजिजिजिज्जि : शिजिजिजिजजी्द्ज्द्जि्द्जिजि्द्जिजि : ।।३३।।

Meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic animals, milk, goat-head; trunk, bile and
blood of pig; oily sesamum seeds–these may be used in pipe fomentation in the form
of decoction by the wise physician who is well conversant with the peculiarities of
place and time and acts rationally. Pipe fomentation may also be prepared from de-
coction of leaves of varuṇa, guḍūcī, eraṇḍa, śigru, mūlaka, sarṣapa, vāsā, vaṃśa,
karañja, arka, aśmantaka, śobhāñjana, saireya, jātī, tulasī and arjaka. The decoction
of bhūtīka and bigger five roots mixed with wine, curd water, urines, sour and uncting
substances is also used in pipe fomentation. [29-33]

एत: जष्द्ज ज्द्जिविशिशेद्जि : शिजज्द्जिजिजश्जि : क्द्जिजिजजश्द्जिशिजिशि्द्जिज्द्जजिजजिज्जि : जजिजिजजिजिज्द्जिजि : जिजिनिजि्द्जिजिज्जिश्द्जि्द्जि्जि : ।।३४।।

These very decoctions may be used in water chamber for fomentation as well.
In the same way, the chamber of ghee, milk and oil may also be prepared for
fomentation. [34]

गोद्जुश्द्जिज्द्जिज्जौद्जौजिशीद्जिजशिविजशिजिजिजिजश्द्जिजिजशिजि : शिजिजिजिजिजिशजिजिजिजजशिजि्द्जि : शजशजजजशजशशशशजजिजजजजि्द्जिजजशजजिजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजज ।
गन्द्जो : शुन्द्जौ : क्द्जिजजजज्द्जजज ज जजजजजजजजज जज जजजजजजजजज जज जजजजजजजजजजजज ।।३५।।
