XV]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  103

Whatever was to be said about fomentation has been said by the great sage.
Here the preceptor is Punarvasu and the disciples have to follow. [68-71]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने स्वेदाध्यायो
नाम चतुर्दशोऽध्यायः ॥१४॥

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter on fomentation in Ślokasthāna in the
treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (14).

                                  •

पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER XV

अथातः उपकल्पनीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on arrangement of accessories etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

इह खलु राजानं राजमात्रं वा विपुलद्रव्यं वा पाययितुकामेन भिषजा प्रागेवमुपदिष्टमुपकरणीयं भवति,
संभारा उपकल्पनीयाः; भवति सम्यक्तेनैव हि गच्छन्तीनां प्रतिकाराणाम्, व्यापदं चौषधे व्यापदः; धरिश्रद्धपूर्ण
प्रतिकारार्थम्; न हि स सज्ञि्षति काले प्रादुर्भायणादि कषाकफमयं सुकरमवाप्तुं संभरणानीनिि भवत्यविति ।।३।।

The physician, who wants to administer emetic or purgative to a king, a kingly
or a wealthy person, has to arrange the necessary equipments before-hand, in order
to provide pleasure in case of the drug being favourable and counter-action in case of
complications arisen keeping in view the nature of complications. Because it is not
possible to arrange for the proper drugs easily and immediately, in spite of the arrangement
of sale and import, in case of emergency occured, where there is no time. [3]

एवंवादिनं भगवन्तमात्रेयमग्निवेश उवाच–न्न्यं भगवन्! आदाव विज्ञानता तथा प्रतिपत्यार्थं यत्तां प्रतिविहितः
सिद्धैधेपयायेकानां, समक्षयेगणनिमिता हि सर्वकर्मणां सिद्धिरिष्टि, व्यापत्संव्यानामसम्यक्योगनिमिता; यत् सम्यगिवेव-
न समासगुक्तं कमं सिद्धिवायैधेति न व्यापदिर्ये, तुल्यो भवति ज्ञानमज्ञानवेति ।।४।।

When Lord Ātreya said this, Agniveśa submitted–O Lord! a learned physician
should counteract in such a way in the beginning itself that the treatment succeeds
surely and invariably, it is said that the success of treatment is achieved by proper
administration and its failure is due to improper administration, but (as observed)
treatment begun properly or improperly succeeds or fails without any rule, showing
