106                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Then the patient should be administered with unction and fomentation as said
earlier. During this period if he is attacked suddenly with some severe mental or
physical disorder, he should be reverted back cautiously and meanwhile the same
treatment should continue. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: continuation on emetic preparation]

After he is treated with unction and fomentation and is cheerful and having
observed that–he is seated comfortably, his food is well-digested, he has taken bath
by head, annointed his body, put on a garland and undamaged cloth has worshipped
the deity, fire, brāhmaṇa, preceptor, elderly persons and the physician, the physician
should, in auspicious time (nakṣatra, karaṇa and muhūrta), should request Brāhmaṇas
to recite swasti-vacana (mantras) and bestow their recital blessings on the drug–a
dose of the decoction of madanaphala added with honey, madhuka, rock salt and
phāṇita–which should then be administered to the patient. [9]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on dosage]

The measure of the dose of the madanaphala decoction and also of all the
evacuative drugs is to be determined according to the person concerned. The quantity
which on administration to a person eliminates the abnormal doṣa but does not pro-
duce conditions of under-use or over-use should be taken as the measure of dose for
that person. [10]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on emetic process]

After the patient has taken the drug, he should be observed–"keeping your lips,
palate and throat open, exert moderately to produce unrisen urges (of vomiting), while bending the
neck and upper part of the back slightly, you may help elimination of the vomit if it is
not complete, after the urge for vomit (you may touch your throat with two fingers
having nails cut or the stalks of water lily and saugandhika (a variety of lotus)." He
should so accordingly. Then the physician should observe carefully the bouts of vomit
collected in the spitoon. By observing, the one expert in this knows the characters of
proper, inadequate or excessive administration. After observing the characters of bouts
he may decide about the necessary action on the basis of symptoms. Hence one should
observe the bouts carefully. [12]
