XVI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                109

अथैनं पुनरेव स्नेहस्वेदाभ्यामुपपाद्याहुतहतहतमनसमभिसमीक्ष्य सुखोषितं सुप्रजीर्णभक्तं कृतहोमबलिमङ्गलप्रायश्चि-
त्तिथिनक्षत्रकरणमुहूर्ते ब्राह्मणानां स्वस्ति वाचयित्वा त्रिवृत्कल्कमक्षमात्रं यथार्हं त्रैफलोदकानुविद्धेन पाययेत्,
प्रसमीक्ष्य दोषभेषजदेशकालसत्त्वशरीराहारसात्म्यसात्म्यप्रकृतिवयसामवस्थान्तराणि विकारांश्च, सम्यक् विरिक्तं चैन-
मनुरूपेण धूमवर्जं विधिनोपाचरेदावलप्राप्तेर्वमनोक्तेन, कल्याणप्रकृतिमुपनतबलवर्णं चैनमुपहतसंज्ञमभिसमीक्ष्य सुखोषितं सुप्रजीर्ण-
भक्तं शिरःस्नातमनुलिप्तमागल्यमनुपहतवस्त्रमाभरणाग्र्यैः समलङ्कृतं सुहृद्दर्शयित्वा शान्तिभिर्दर्शयित्वा,
अथैनं कामेनावसृजेत् ॥१७॥

(For administration of purgative) the patient should again be prepared by
subjecting him to unction and fomentation. Thereafter, when he is cheerful, seated
comfortably, has food well-digested, has done oblation, offering, auspicious and
expiatory rites, after recitation of svastivācana (mantras wishing well-being) by
brāhmaṇas, on a day having auspicious tithi, nakṣatra, karaṇa and muhūrta, he should
be asked to take the paste of trivṛt (a purgative drug) in the dose of karṣa (10 gm.)
suspended in a proper vehicle. The drug should be administered keeping in view the
conditions of disorder, drug, place, time, strength, body, diet, wholesomeness, mind,
constitution and age and also the disorders. When the patient is purgated well, he
should follow the regimen except smoking as said in the context of emesis till he
regains strength, complexion and normalcy. When he is endowed with strength and
complexion, is cheerful, comfortable and with his food well-digested, he should take
bath by head, annoint his body, wear garland, put on undamaged dress and wear
suitable ornaments. Then he should meet his friends and kinsmen and be allowed to
do his normal duties. [17]

भवति चात्र–
अनेन विधिना राजा राजमात्रोऽथवा पुनः । यस्य वा विपुलं द्रव्यं स स संशोधनमर्हति ॥१८॥

Here are (the verses)–

By this method, the king, the kingly and that having immense wealth can be treated
with evacuatives. [18]

दरिद्रस्यापि च प्राप्य प्राणकालं विशोधनम् । पिबेत् कामयसंभूयं संभारानपि दुर्लभान् ॥१९॥
न हि सर्वमनुष्याणां सन्ति सर्वे परिष्कराः । न च रोगा न बाधन्ते दरिद्रानपि दारुणाः ॥२०॥
यथास्वमेतन्मनुष्येण कर्तुमीहायिदं भवेत् । तस्माद्देयं सग्रहीषासंशान्तिः वसनाशनादि च ॥२१॥

The poor too in case of a disorder requiring evacuation may take the drug even
without collecting the rare equipments. Because all men do not have all the requisite
means and it is also not that the severe diseases do not attack the poor ones. Hence
one should take, in case of affliction, the treatment and also the cloths and diets
according to his means. [19-21]
