XVII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  117

vātika heart disease, the symptoms are–trembling, cramps, stiffness, fainting, vacant
look, tearing pain and aggravation of pain when the food is during digestion. [30-34]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on pittaja heart disease]

Hot, sour, salty, alkaline and pungent food, eating during indigestion, wines,
anger and the sun vitiate the pitta in the heart. In this pittaja heart disease, these
symptoms appear–burning sensation in cardiac region, bitterness in mouth, bitter
and sour eructation, exhaustion, thirst, tearing pain and perspiration. [32-33]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on kaphaja heart disease]

Kaphaja heart disease is caused by excessive intake, use of heavy and unctuous
substances, little mental and physical work and indulgence in sleep. In this the patient
suffers from drowsiness and anorexia and feeling of numbness, cold and weight in
the cardiac region as if it is pressed with stone. [34-35]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on sānnipātika heart disease]

When causative factors and symptoms of all the doṣas are combined together it is
sānnipātika (produced by combination of all the three doṣas).

(Heart disease is troublesome and hardly curable as said by the great sages.)

The evil-natured one takes sesamum, milk, jaggery etc. in the heart disease
caused by all the three doṣas, suffers from a gland appearing in a portion of the
heart. Moreover, his rasadhātu attains moisture in a portion of the vital organ due to
which organisms develop, spread in the region and lead to decay of the heart. The
patient feels pain as if the heart is pierced by needles or cut by weapons, itching and
intense pain. Diagnosing the case as krimija hṛdroga (heart disease caused by
organisms) on the basis of the above symptoms one should take immediate steps to
overcome the disorder which is emergent as well as severe. [36-40]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on numerical types]

Combination of all the three aggravated doṣas is of thirteen types–two doṣas
dominating (3), one doṣa dominating (3), doṣas in diminished, moderate and domi-
