122                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: verses on viśradhi (abscess) types]

Vidradhi (abscess) is of two types–external and internal. The external one is
located in skin, ligament and muscle, resembles tendon and is very painful.

By intake of winter cereals, burning, hot, rough and dry food, taking antagonis-
tic, during indigestion, mixed up, irregularly and unwholesome diet; drinking
damaged and plenty of wine, suppression of urges, fatigue, complicated physical
exercise and sleep, excessive weight-carrying, travelling on foot and sexual inter-
course; when doṣas in body affect the māṃsa and rakta, deep-seated, painful and
severe gland like node appears in cardiac region, kloman, liver, spleen, lumbar
region, kidneys, navel, groins or urinary bladder. Because of having impure blood in
abundance it gets quickly inflamed and that is why it is called as vidradhi (that causes
vidāha–inflammation). In vidradhi predominant in vāta, perforating and cutting pain,
giddiness, distension, sound, throbbing and spreading characters are there. In paittika
type, thirst, burning sensation, fainting, narcosis and fever while in kaphaja type yawn-
ing, nausea, anorexia, stiffness and shivering are there. In all types of abscess,
intense pain is the main symptom. The pain may be of various natures such as cutting,
burning or stinging. (As regards the character of discharge), it is thin, rough, reddish
or blackish and foamy in vātika vidradhi; resembling soup of sesamum, black gram
and kulattha in paittika vidradhi and white, slimy, thick and abundant in kaphaja
vidradhi. The sānnipātika type (caused by the combination of all the three doṣas) has
got all the above symptoms. [99-100]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on prognosis]

Now (I) shall tell about the particular symptoms according to location of
vidradhis for the knowledge of prognosis. In vidradhi located in the main vital
organ (heart), there will be palpitation, feeling of darkness before eyes, cough
and dyspnoea; in that located in kloman, there will be thirst, dryness of mouth and
