XIX]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  133

fainting, four types of wasting, four types of impotency; three types of swelling,
three types of leucoderma, three types of internal haemorrhage.

Two fevers, two wounds, two types of contractures, two types of sciatica, two
types of jaundice, two types of āma, two types of vātarakta, two types of piles;

One ūrustambha (thigh stiffness), one coma, one great disease.

Twenty groups of krimis (organisms), twenty types of prameha, twenty types of
yonivyāpat (female uterine disorders).

Thus forty eight disease-syndromes have been mentioned in this context. [3]

[Devanagari unclear: long passage on numerical breakdown of types]

Eight kuṣṭhas (leprosies) are vātika, paittika, kaphaja, sānnipātodara, śarkara
and prākaraṇa, and dakodara. Eight types of udara are due to vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta, aśmari (stone), śarkarā (gravels), śukra (semen) śoṇita
(blood). Eight defects of breast-milk are–abnormal colour, abnormal smell, abnormal
taste, sliminess, frothiness, roughness (fat below normal), heaviness and excess of
fat. Eight types of defective semen are–dilute, dry, frothy, whitish, putrid, over-slimy,
mixed with other materials, precipitating. (1)

Seven types of leprosy are–kapāla, udumbara, maṇḍala, ṛṣyajihwa, puṇḍarīka,
sidhma, kākaṇa. Seven diabetic boils are–śarāvikā, kacchapikā, jālinī, sarṣapī, alajī,
vinatā, vidradhi. Seven types of visarpa (erysipelas) are those caused by vāta, pitta,
kapha, sannipāta and agni, kardamaka and granthi. (2)

Six types of diarrhoea are those caused by vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta, fear and
grief. Six types of udāvarta (upward movement of vāyu) are those caused by (sup-
pression of natural urges of) flatus, urine, faeces, semen, vomiting and sneezing. (3)

Five types of gulma are those caused by vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta and
rakta. Similar are the disorders of spleen. Five types of cough are there due to
vāta, pitta, kapha, kṣata (injury) and kṣaya (wasting). Five types of dyspnoea are
mahā (major), ūrdhwa (upward), chinna (intermittent), tamaka (bronchial
asthma), kṣudra (minor). Five types of hiccup are–major, deeper, intermittent,
minor and dietitic. Five types of thirst–due to vāta, pitta, āma, wasting and as
complication. Five types of vomiting are those due to exposure to undesirable
sense objects and aggravation of vāta, pitta, kapha and sannipāta. Five types of
