140                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse summary of vāta disorders]

Other disorders also which arise from disequilibrium of vāta should be diagnosed
as those caused by vāta on the basis of similar symptoms. The number of these dis-
orders is innumerable but their characteristic symptoms are common to vāta. The
treatment of these disorders is by application of vāta-pacifying measures. [12-13]

These innumerable disorders also arise out of disequilibrium of vāta. They get
relieved with vāta-pacifying therapeutic measures.

[Devanagari unclear: long verse list of paittika disorders]

The forty disorders of paittika are–burning sensation, hot sensation, heat,
burning of skin, ulceration of skin, ulceration of muscles, abscess, sweating,
foul smell of body, melting away (of body parts), itching, urticaria, jaundice,
bitter taste in mouth, bloody belching, foul smell of mouth, excessive thirst,
exhaustion, fainting, hot fever, internal haemorrhage, blue spots, blue eyes,
yellow eyes, yellow stools, yellow urine, green colour, blue colour, vibhrama,
bloody discharge in feet (etc.), inflammation of liver, etc.; rakta-pitta, men-
struation in excess, paittika diarrhoea, paittika fever, etc.

These are some of the prominent disorders of pitta caused by aggravation
of pitta. They are alleviated by therapeutic measures opposite to pitta. [14]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse list of kaphaja disorders]

The twenty kaphaja disorders are–anorexia, drowsiness, narcosis, heaviness,
laziness, excessive sweetness in mouth, excessive salivation, excessive secretions,
loss of strength, sluggishness in voice, indigestion, increased mass-state,
ojas-meha (loss of ojas), constipation, hardness in bowels, kapha-fever,
swelling, white spots in skin, white urine, sluggish digestion, generalised cold-
ness in body.

These are some of the prominent disorders of kapha caused by aggravation
of kapha. They are alleviated by therapeutic measures opposite to kapha. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: continuing verse on therapeutics]
