XXI]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  141

perspiration, foul smell in body, tearing of body parts, excessive moisture in blood¹,
moistening of muscles, burning in skin, tearing of skin, thickening of skin, urticarial
patches, pustules, internal haemmorrage, haemorrhagic patches, greenishness, yellow-
ness, bluishness, herpes, jaundice, bitterness in mouth, bloody smell from mouth, foetid
smell from mouth, excessive thirst, loss of contentment, stomatitis, inflammation in
throat, inflammation in eyes, inflammation in anus, inflammation in penis, discharge
of pure blood, fainting, green or yellow colour in eyes, urine and faeces–these are the
prominent ones among the innumerable disorders of pitta. [14]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on paittika diagnosis]

In all these disorders of pitta–said or unsaid–the following ones are the specific
characters and actions finding which wholly or partly the expert physicians diagnose
the case undoubtedly as one of the paittika disorders. Such as–heat, sharpness, fluid-
ity, slight unctuousness, colours except white and reddish, fishy smell, pungent and
sour taste and movability–are the specific character of pitta. This sort of pitta exhibits
the following actions in respective parts where it enters into. Such as–burning, heat,
inflammation, perspiration, moisture, sloughing, itching, discharge and redness
alongwith the appearance of respective smell, colour and taste–and the action of pitta,
which, if found, indicate undoubtedly the paittika disorders. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on treatment of pitta]

This should be managed with sweet, bitter, astringent and cold measures and also
by application of unction, purgation, pasting, bath, massage etc. which alleviate pitta,
according to proper dose and time. Purgation is regarded as the most important one
amongst all the therapies for pitta by physician because from the very start on enter-
ing into the āmāśaya (location of āma doṣa) it extracts the entire pathogenic root of
pitta and when it is overcome, the paittika manifestations in the body get pacified like
the fire-chamber which becomes cool when the fire is removed. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on kaphaja disorders]

1. Now-a-days some scholars take it as uraemic condition.
