XXV]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  165

Kāṅkāyana said–'No, (this is not so) because in that case there can't be any
initiation (of action) and its results and the accomplishment or otherwise of the objects
would be by nature itself. Hence (in my view), Prajāpati, the descendant of Brahmā
and having unlimited determination, is the creator of the world-sentient and insenti-
ent–as well as pleasure and pain. [22-23]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on Bhikṣu Ātreya]

(On this) Ātreya, the mendicant, said–'No, (this is not so) because Prajāpati, be-
ing the well-wisher of his progeny, could not subject it constantly to painful situations
like an unkind man. (Hence in my view) person is the product of Kāla (the time fac-
tor) and so are his diseases. The entire universe is governed by time which is the
universal cause. [24-25]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on Punarvasu]

When the sages were debating like this, Punarvasu said–'Do not speak so be-
cause by adherance to a side the reality can be attained only with difficulty. Those
placing their views as well as their refutations as decided facts can not reach the end
of the controversy like an oil presser in the (cyclic) movement. Hence leave this con-
frontation of views and think over the realty because until unless the covering of the
mass of tamas from the object is removed, the knowledge would not come forth. (the
conclusion of the real position is that) the entities, which in suitable state, generate
person, cause the various disorders in unsuitable state. [26-29]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Vāmaka]

Having listened to Lord Ātreya, Vāmaka, the king of Kāśī, again put the query to
him–'Sir, what is the cause of development of person produced by the suitability (of
factors) and the diseases produced by the unsuitability (of the same). [30]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Lord Ātreya's reply]

Lord Ātreya replied to him–'Only the use of wholesome food promotes the growth
of person and that of unwholesome one is the cause of disorders. [31]
