174                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

prepared of cereals) surā, sauvīra, tuṣodaka, maireya, medaka and dhānyāmla, Twenty
six phalāsavas (āsavas prepared of fruits) from the fruits of grapes, dates, gambhārī,
dhanwana, rājādana, ketakī, paruṣaka, harītakī, āmalakā, mṛgalindikā, jambu,
kapittha, kuvala, badara, karkandhu, pīlu, priyāla, panasa, nyagrodha, aśwattha,
plakṣa, parīṣa, udumbara, ajamodā, śṛṅgāṭaka and śaṅkhinī. Mūlāsavas (āsavas
prepared from roots) are eleven such as prepared from the roots of) śālaparṇī,
aśwagandhā, śobhāñjana, śatāvarī, śyāmā, trivṛt, dantī, dravantī, bilwa, eraṇḍa
and citraka. Sārāsavas (āsavas prepared from the heartwood) are twenty such as prepared
from the heartwood of) śāla, priyaka (nīpa), aśwakarṇa, candana, syandana, khadira,
kadara, saptaparṇa, arjuna, asana, arimeda, tinduka, kiṇihī, śamī, badarī, śiṃśapā,
śirīṣa, vañjula, dhanwana and madhūka. Puṣpāsavas (āsavas prepared from flowers)
are ten such as those prepared from (the flowers of) padma, utpala, nalina, kumuda,
saugandhika, puṇḍarīka, śatapatra, madhūka, priyaṅgu and dhātakī. Kāṇḍāsavas
(āsavas prepared from stems) such as those prepared from ikṣu (sugarcane), kāṇḍekṣa,
ikṣubālikā and puṇḍraka. Patrāsavas (āsavas prepared from leaf) are two such as
those prepared from (the leaves of) paṭola and tālaka. Twagāsavas (āsavas prepared
from bark of) tilwaka, lodhra, elavāluka and kramuka. Śarkarāsava (āsava prepared
from sugar) is only one. Thus the number eighty four of the āsavas is according to
the single substances used in their preparation. They are known as 'āsava' because of
their nature 'āsuta' (being fermented). These have various types of drugs, their
conjunction and disjunction and also the methods of preparation. They exhibit their
effect on the basis of their respective composition and method of preparation. In
order to have those effects, the factors like combination, method of preparation, place,
time, quantity etc. in relation to those āsavas, are decided. [49]

भवति चात्र–

Here is (the verse)–

[Devanagari unclear: verses on prominent āsavas]

The eighty four prominent āsavas have been said here which promote strength
of mind, body and digestion; alleviate sleeplessness, anxiety and anorexia and are
exhilarating. [50]

तत्र श्लोकाः–

[Devanagari unclear: summary verses]

Now (the summing up) verse–
