176                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

substratum of rasas dependent on natural composition, products, preparation, place
and time; heavy, light, cold, hot, unctuous, rough etc. are the properties residing in
those substrata known as dravya (substance or drug). 'Kṣāra' is so called because of
(having) elimination action.

Those drugs are active not only by virtue of their rasa but rather of dravya (substance) having
been derived from many substances, having many rasas predominantly pungent and
saline, with many sense objects and produced by a particular method of preparation.
Unmanifestedness is there in primordial source of rasa, anurasa (secondary rasa) and
in the substance having anurasa. Innumerableness (of rasa) due to that of the factors
like substratum etc. is not justified because even a single (rasa) is attached to in-
numerable factors like substratum etc. still it does not forego its identity. Even in case
of the combination of rasas, there is no innumerableness in the primordial source,
natural properties and actions that is why the intelligent ones do not describe the
action of the combined rasas. Based on this fact, (I) will describe the characters of
uncombined six rasas separately. [9]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on six rasas]

First of all (I) will tell something about the details on drugs. In this context,
drugs is constituted of five bhūtas–pṛthivī, ap, tejas, vāyu and ākāśa. It is (of two
types) sentient and insentient. Its properties are sound etc. and those from guru to
drava, and its action has been said as five-fold–lavaṇa etc. [10]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on dravyas]

Dravyas (drugs), which are predominant in properties of heavy, coarse, hard,
dull, stable, non-slimy, solid, gross and smell are pārthiva (constituted predominantly
by pṛthivī bhūta). They exert actions like development, compactness, heaviness
and firmness.

Those predominant in properties of liquid, unctuous, cold, dull, soft, slimy and
taste are āpya (constituted predominantly by ap bhūta). They exert actions like mois-
tening, unction, binding, oozing, softening and exhilaration.

Dravyas predominant in properties of hot, sharp, minute, light, rough, non-slimy
and vision are āgneya (constituted predominantly by tejas bhūta). They exert ac-
tions of digestion, lustre, light and complexion.
