184                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

abundance of vāyu and agni, it produces vātika disorders in feet, hands, sides, back
etc. particularly with symptoms like movements, burning pain, tremors, piercing and
tearing pains. (4)

Tikta rasa, though itself non-relishing destroys disrelish, is antipoison,
anthelmintic, alleviates fainting, burning sensation, itching, leprosy (including skin
disorders) and thirst; provides firmness to skin and muscles, is antipyretic, appetiser,
digestive, galacto-depurant, reducing, absorbent of moisture, fat, muscle-fat, marrow,
lymph, pus, sweat, urine, faeces, pitta and kapha; and is rough, cold and light. This,
though possessing so many qualities, if used singly and excessively, on account of
its roughness, coarseness and non-sliminess, dries up rasa, rakta, māṃsa, medas,
asthi, majjā and śukra; causes coarseness in channels, takes away strength, produces
emaciation, malaise, mental confusion, giddiness, dryness of mouth and other vātika
disorders. (5)

Kaṣāya rasa is pacifying, astringent, union-promoting, compressing, healing,
absorbing, checking (discharges); pacifies kapha, rakta and pitta; utilises the
body fluid, is rough, cold and slightly light. This, though possessing so many
qualities, if used singly and excessively, dries up mouth, causes heart-ache, flatu-
lence, hindrance in voice, slowing of movement in channels, blackishness, impotency,
gas formation during digestion; checks flatus, urine, faeces and semen; produces
emaciation, malaise, thirst, stiffness; and, because of its coarseness, non-sliminess
and roughness, causes vātika disorders like hemiplegia, spasm, convulsions, facial
paralysis etc. [43]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on six rasas in proper quantity]

These six rasas, when used in proper quantity, are beneficial for the living be-
ings, otherwise become harmful. Hence the wise should use these properly in proper
quantity in order to derive benefit (from them). [44]

भवति चात्र–

Here are (the verses)–

[Devanagari unclear: verse on rasa-vipāka]

The substance (drug or diet) which is madhura in rasa and vipāka (biotrans-
formation) is śīta (cold) in vīrya (potency). Likewise, the substance, amla in
rasa and vipāka, or kaṭuka in the same, is uṣṇa (hot) in vīrya. [45]
