188                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Having listened to Lord Ātreya, Agniveśa said–Sir, we heard your factual and
significant talk on dravya, guṇa and karma. Now we want to hear not too brief de-
scription of the antagonistic food items. [80]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on antagonistic food (virodha)]

Lord Ātreya addressed to him–the substances which are contrary to dehadhātus
behave with virodha (antagonism) to them. This antagonism may be in terms of pro-
perties, combination, processing, place, time, dose etc. or natural composition. [81]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on antagonistic food list]

Amongst them, (I) will mention the antagonistics in part of food which is mostly
used–such as, one should not take fish with milk. Combination of both of them is
madhura (rasa); madhura vipāka, mahābhiṣyandī (great obstructor for the channels),
because of śita (milk) and uṣṇa (fish) is virodhavīrya (antagonistic in terms of vīrya),
due to conflicting vīryas, it vitiates blood and due to being mahābhiṣyandī, creates
obstruction in channels. [82]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Bhadrakāpya's question]

Having heard the statement of Ātreya, Bhadrakāpya said to Agniveśa–now I may
take all types of fish alongwith milk except only one cilacima. That scaly, red-eyed,
with around red strips, having shape like that of rohita often moves on land. If one
takes it alongwith milk, he undoubtedly becomes victim of one of the disorders of
blood or constipation or death. [83]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on cilacima exception]

'No'–said Lord Ātreya. One should not take any fish alongwith milk particularly
cilacima because it, being great obstructor of channels, produces these disorders with
gross symptoms and also excites āmaviṣa. Meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic ani-
mals should not be taken mixed with honey, sesamum, jaggery, milk, black gram,
radish, lotus stalk or germinated grains because it causes deafness, blindness,
tremors, coldness, indistinct voice, nasal voice or death. The potherb of puṣkara or
rohiṇī or (meat of) pigeon fried with mustard oil should not be taken alongwith honey
and milk because it causes obstruction in blood-circulation, athero-sclerosis, epilepsy,
śaṅkhaka, goitre, rohiṇī or death. After eating radish, garlic, śigru, arjaka, tulasī
etc. one should not take milk because of the risk of leprosy. The potherb of jātuka
or ripe (fruit of) nikuca should not be taken alongwith honey and milk as it causes
death, or loss of strength, lustre, energy and prowess; severe diseases and impotency.
The same ripe (fruit of) nikuca should not be taken with black gram, pulse, jaggery
and ghee because they are antagonistic. Likewise, āmra, āmrātaka, mātulunga, nikuca,
karamarda, moca, dantaśaṭha, badara, kośāmra, bhavya, jambu, nārikela, dāḍima,
āmalaka–these fruits and similar other substances, all sour liquids or non-liquids
are antagonistic to milk. Kāṅgu, vanaka, makuṣṭhaka, kulattha, black gram and
nispāva are antagonistic to milk. The potherb of padmottarikā (kusumbha), śārkara
and maireya (types of wine) and madhu, all used together are antagonistic and
vitiate vāta too much. Hāridraka (a bird) fried with mustard oil is antagonistic
and vitiates pitta too much. Pāyasa (rice cooked with milk) taken with after drink
of mantha (a drink prepared from roasted grain flour) is antagonistic and vitiates
kapha too much. Upodikā (a pot-herb) cooked with sesamum paste causes diarrhoea.
(Meat of) balākā (crane) alongwith vāruṇī (a type of wine) or kulmāṣa (grains soaked
