XXVI]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  189

[Devanagari unclear: long verse listing antagonistic combinations continued]

'No'–said Lord Ātreya. One should not take any fish alongwith milk particularly
cilacima, being great obstructor of channels, produces these disorders with
gross symptoms and also excites āmaviṣa. Meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic ani-
mals should not be taken mixed with honey, sesamum, jaggery, milk, black gram,
radish, lotus stalk or germinated grains because it causes deafness, blindness,
tremors, coldness, indistinct voice, nasal voice or death. The potherb of puṣkara or
rohiṇī or (meat of) pigeon fried with mustard oil should not be taken alongwith honey
and milk because it causes obstruction in blood-circulation, athero-sclerosis, epilepsy,
śaṅkhaka, goitre, rohiṇī or death. After eating radish, garlic, śigru, arjaka, tulasī
etc. one should not take milk because of the risk of leprosy. The potherb of jātuka
or ripe (fruit of) nikuca should not be taken alongwith honey and milk as it causes
death, or loss of strength, lustre, energy and prowess; severe diseases and impotency.
The same ripe (fruit of) nikuca should not be taken with black gram, pulse, jaggery
and ghee because they are antagonistic. Likewise, āmra, āmrātaka, mātulunga, nikuca,
karamarda, moca, dantaśaṭha, badara, kośāmra, bhavya, jambu, nārikela, dāḍima,
āmalaka–these fruits and similar other substances, all sour liquids or non-liquids
are antagonistic to milk. Kāṅgu, vanaka, makuṣṭhaka, kulattha, black gram and
nispāva are antagonistic to milk. The potherb of padmottarikā (kusumbha), śārkara
and maireya (types of wine) and madhu, all used together are antagonistic and
vitiate vāta too much. Hāridraka (a bird) fried with mustard oil is antagonistic
and vitiates pitta too much. Pāyasa (rice cooked with milk) taken with after drink
of mantha (a drink prepared from roasted grain flour) is antagonistic and vitiates
kapha too much. Upodikā (a pot-herb) cooked with sesamum paste causes diarrhoea.
(Meat of) balākā (crane) alongwith vāruṇī (a type of wine) or kulmāṣa (grains soaked
