198                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Lāva (commonquail), vartīraka, vārtika, kapiñjala, cakora, upacakra, kukkubha,
raktavartma–these in the 'Lāvādya' viṣkira (birds similar to common quail who eat
while scattering the grains.)

Now the other sub-group 'vartakādi' of viṣkira birds will be said. Vartaka (male
bustard), vartikā (female bustard), peacock, tittira (partridge), cock, kaṅka, śārapada,
indrābha, gonarda, girivartaka, krakara, avakara, varāḍa–these are the gallinaceous
animals in the second sub-group.

Śatapatra, bhṛngarāja, koyaṣṭi, jīvañjīvaka, kairāta, kokila, atyūha, gopāputra,
priyātmaja, laṭṭā, laṭṭā(tu)saka, babhru, vaṭahā, vaṭahā, jaṭī, dundubhi, pākkāra,
lohapṛṣṭha, kuliṅgaka, kapota (pigeon), śuka (parrot), sāraṅga, cirāṭi, kaṅku, yaṣṭika,
sārikā, kalviṅka, cataka, aṅgāracūḍaka pārāwata (dove), paṇḍa (na) vika–these are
the birds known as pratuda (who eat while striking). [35-52]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on six broad groups of meat]

They are called as 'prasaha' because they eat by snatching, 'Bhūsaya' is known
so as they live in burrows. Likewise, 'ānūpa' are due to their habitat in marshy lands,
'Jalaja' are because they live in waters while 'jalecara' move on/then but are born on
land. 'Jāṅgala' animals live in forests. 'Viṣkira' birds eat while scattering and pratuda
ones are pecker birds. These are the eight sources of meat. [53-55]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on prasaha and bhūṣaya etc. effects]

Prasaha, bhūṣaya, ānūpa, vārija and vāricārin are heavy, hot, sweet, promote
strength and development, are aphrodisiac, alleviate vāta, aggravate kapha and pitta,
and are useful for the persons taking regular physical exercise and having strong
digestive power.

The meat of prasaha animals and birds who are carnivorous is useful for those
suffering from chronic piles, grahaṇī doṣa and phthisis. The viṣkira birds of the lāvādi
sub-group, pecker bird and forest-dweller animals are light, cold, sweet, slightly as-
tringent and useful for the patients of sannipāta having preponderance of pitta, vāta
in moderate degree and kapha in the lowest one. The viṣkira birds of the vartakādi
sub-group are slightly inferior in properties to those of jāṅgala animals and birds. [56-60]
