200                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

heavy, hot, unctuous, sweet, promote voice, complexion and strength, are bulk-pro-
moting, increase semen and alleviate vāta.

Cocks are unctuous, hot, aphrodisiac, bulk-promoting, voice-awakening, tonic,
excellently alleviating vāta and are diaphoretic.

Partridge is heavy, hot and sweet. Its habitat being not too arid or too marshy, it
alleviates three doṣas with predominance of vāta.

Grey partridge, because of coldness, sweetness and lightness, is beneficial for
the disorders of pitta, kapha, rakta and those having mildness of vāta.

Common quail is astringent-sweet, light, stimulant of agni, alleviates sannipāta
and is kaṭuvipāka.

Godhā (iguana) is madhura in vipāka, kaṣāya and kaṭu in rasa, alleviates vāta and
pitta, is bulk-promoting and tonic.

Śallaka is sweet sour (in rasa), kaṭu in vipāka, alleviates vāta, pitta and kapha
and removes cough and dyspnoea.

The domestic pigeons are astringent, non-slimy, cold, alleviate internal haemor-
rhage and are madhura in vipāka. The wild pigeons are slightly lighter, cold, consti-
pating and diminishing the (quantity of) urine.

The meat of the parrot is astringent-sour, rūkṣa (kaṭu) in vipāka, śīta, useful in
phthisis, cough and wasting; constipating, light and appetiser.

Cataka (sparrow) is sweet, unctuous, promotes strength and semen, alleviates
sannipāta, particularly vāta.

Hare is astringent, non-slimy, rough, cold, kaṭu vipāka, light, sweet and useful
in sannipāta with mild vāta.

Eṇa (black buck) is madhura, madhura vipāka, alleviates three doṣas, is
wholesome, light, constipating, anti-diuretic and cold.

Pork is uncting, bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac, alleviates fatigue and vāta, pro-
motes strength, relish in food and sweating, and is heavy.

Beef is useful in absolute vāta, chronic rhinitis, intermittent fevers, dry cough,
fatigue. excessive agni and wasting of muscles.

Buffalow-meat is unctuous, hot, sweet, aphrodisiac, heavy and saturating. It pro-
duces firmness, bulk, courage and sleep.

Fishes are heavy, hot, sweet, tonic, bulk-promoting, vāta-alleviating, unctuous,
aphrodisiac and has plenty of demerits. Among them, rohita, because of eating algae
and grass and also avoidance of sleep, is appetiser, laghupāka (light in digestion) and
strength-promoting.

Tortoise is useful for complexion, alleviate vāta, is aphrodisiac, promotes vision
and strength, is conducive to intellect and memory, wholesome and destroys phthisis.
