XXVII]                        SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  201

The meat of khaḍga (rhinoceros) is obstructing to channels, strength-promo-
ting, sweet, uncting, bulk-promoting, beneficial for complexion, alleviates fatigue
and vāta.

Eggs of swans, chakora, hens, peacocks, and sparrows–are useful in diminished
semen, cough, heart disease and injuries. They are sweet, not causing burning sensa-
tion and immediately strength-promoting. For promoting the bulk of the body no other
food item excels meat. Thus the third group of meat is described. [63-87]

अथ शाकवर्गः–

Group of vegetables:

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on vegetables]

The vegetables of pāṭhā, kāsamarda, śaṭī, vāstuka, suniṣaṇṇaka alleviate three
doṣas and are constipating except vāstuka which is laxative.

Kākamācī alleviates three doṣas, is aphrodisiac, rasāyana, not too hot or too cold,
purgative and anti-leprotic.

Rājakṣavaka alleviates three doṣas, is light, constipating and beneficial particu-
larly for those suffering from grahaṇīdoṣa and piles.

Kālaśāka is pungent, appetiser, alleviates poison and swelling, is light, hot, vāta-
aggravating and rough.

(Amla) cāṅgerī is appetiser, uṣṇavīrya, constipating, useful in kapha and vāta,
and beneficial in grahaṇī and piles.

Upodikā is madhura rasa, madhura vipāka, purgative, kapha-aggravating, aphro-
disiac, unctuous, cold and anti-narcosis.

Taṇḍulīya is rough, anti-narcosis, anti-poison, beneficial in internal haemorrhage,
madhura rasa, madhura vipāka and cold.

Maṇḍukaparṇī, tip of vetra, kucelā, vanatiktaka, karkoṭaka, bākucī, paṭola,
śakulādanī, flowers of vāsā, śārṅgeṣṭā, kembūka, kaṭhillaka, nāḍī, kalāya, gojihvā,
vārtāka, tilaparṇikā, kulaka, karkaśa, nimba and parpaṭa–These are the bitter vegeta-
bles. They alleviate kapha and pitta and are śītavīrya and kaṭuvipāka. [88-89]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on legumes and other items]

All legumes, phāṇjī, cillī, kutumbaka, all (types of) āluka with leaves, kuṭhiñjara,
flowers of śaṇa and śālmali; karbudāra, suvarcalā, nispāva, kovidāra, pattūra,
cuccuparṇikā, kumārajīva, loṭṭaka, pālaṅkya, mārṣa, kalamba, nālikā, āśurī, kusumbha,
vṛkadhūmaka, lakṣmaṇā, cakramarda, nalinīkā, kuṭheraka, lonikā, yavasāka,
kūṣmāṇḍaka, bākucī, yātuka, śālakalyāṇī, triparṇī, piluparṇikā,–these vegetables are
heavy, rough and often digest with distension. They are madhura, śīta vīrya and pur-
gative. They should be boiled, the juice be expressed out and then added with some
fat before intake.

The flowers of śaṇa, kovidāra, karbudāra and śālmali are checking and are useful
particularly in internal haemorrhage.

The tender young leaves of vaṭa, undumbara, aśwattha, plakṣa, lotus etc. are as-
tringent, checking, cold and beneficial in pittaja diarrhoea.

Vatsadānī alleviates vāyu; gandīra, abrīda alleviate kapha; śreyasi, Bilwaparnī
and bilwa (leaves) alleviate vāta.

Bhaṇḍī, śatāvarī, balā, jīvantī, parvaṇī, parvapuṣpī–these alleviate vāta and pitta.

The vegetable of lāṅgalikā and eraṇḍa are light, purgative and bitter.
