210                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Pakvarasa is relishing, appetiser, cordial, beneficial is phthisis, swelling and
piles, alleviates disorders of fat and kapha and improves complexion.

Sītarasika is digestive, alleviates constipation, cleanses voice and complexion,
is emaciating and beneficial in swelling, abdominal disorders and piles.

Gauda eliminates faeces and flatus, and is saturating and appetiser.

Akṣikī is useful in anaemia and wounds, and is appetiser.

Surāsava is strongly intoxicating, alleviates vāta and is palatable.

Madhwāsava is expectorant and sharp.

Maireya is sweet and heavy.

The āsava of mṛdvīkā (grapes) and ikṣu rasa (sugarcane juice) combined and
fermented with dhātakī flowers is cordial, rough, relishing, appetiser, similar to
mādhvīka, but not very hot.

Madhu is relishing, appetiser, cordial, tonic, non-antagonistic to pitta, alleviates
constipation and kapha, is light and has little vāta.

The surā alongwith maṇḍa (upper clear portion) prepared of barley is rough, hot
and aggravates vāta and pitta.

Madhūlikā is heavy, digests with distension and aggravates kapha.

Sauvīraka and tuṣodaka are appetisers, digestive, alleviate disorders of heart,
anaemia, and helminthiasis, are beneficial in grahaṇī and piles and are mass-break-
ing.

Sour vinegar alleviates burning sensation and fever by external application and
vāta and kapha by internal administration. It relieves constipation, propels (excre-
ment) downwards and is appetiser.

The fresh wine is mostly heavy and aggravates doṣas while the old one cleanses
channels, is appetiser, light and relishing.

Wine is exhilarating, nourishing, removes fear, grief and fatigue, provides bold-
ness, energy, imgination, satisfaction, corpulence and strength. It is like nectar if used
by persons predominant in sattva according to rules and with reasoning.

Thus the seventh group relating to fermented liquors is described. [178-195]

अथ जलवर्गः–

[Devanagari unclear: verse on water from sky]

Group of various types of water :

Entire water is only one which falls down as rain from the sky. That while falling
or having fallen down depend on place and time. [196]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on natural state of water]
