XXVII]                        SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  215

[Devanagari unclear: verses on jaggery and refined sugar]

Jaggery and minor jaggery produce plenty of worms, marrow, blood, fat and
muscle. The cane-juice remained one fourth, one-third and half (in the process of
boiling) is heavy in the preceding order.

Guḍa is the cleaned portion having little mala (molasses). Thereafter, by gradual
elimination of mala matsyaṇḍikā, (semisolid treacle), khaṇḍa (yellowish sugar) and
śarkarā (white sugar) emerge. Coldness increases in them gradually as their mala is
eliminated.

The sugar obtained from jaggery is aphrodisiac, beneficial for the wounded and
is unctuous. That obtained from yāsa is astringent-sweet, cold and slightly bitter. The
honey-sugar is rough, anti-emetic, anti-diarrhoeal, and expectorant. All sugars are
useful in thirst, internal haemorrhage and burning sensation. [238-242]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on madhu (honey)]

Honey is of four types–Mākṣika (derived from makṣika), bhrāmara (derived from
bhramara), kṣaudra (derived from kṣudrā) and pauttika (derived from puttikā). Amongst
them, mākṣika honey is the best one and the bhrāmara is the heaviest one. Mākṣika
honey has oil-like colour, pauttika is of ghee-like colour, kṣaudra is brownish and
bhrāmara is white. Honey aggravates vāta, is heavy, cold, alleviates disorders of
rakta, pitta and kapha; is union-promoter, expectorant, rough, astringent, and sweet.

Honey, if heated or taken by a person suffering from heat becomes fatal due to its
association with poisons. Honey is useful in small quantity due to its properties–heavy,
rough, astringent and cold. [243-246]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on madhāma]

There is noting so severe as madhāma (āma caused by honey), as because of its
conflicting treatment, it immediately kills the person like poison. In āma, hot meas-
ures are generally prescribed but in madhyama it becomes conflicting. Hence it is
very severe and kills immediately like poison. [247-248]
