XXVIII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               221

Sauvarchalā salt, due to its penetrating, hot, light and aromatic properties, is
relishing, laxative, cordial and normalises eructation.

Biḍa salt, owing to sharpness, hotness and quick absorption, is appetiser, re-
lieves colic, expels wind both upwards and downwards.

Audbhida salt is slightly pungent-bitter and alkaline, sharp and irritant.

Kāla (black) salt has all the properties of sauvarcala except the smell.

Sāmudra is slightly sweet while pāṃsuja is pungent and slightly bitter.

All salts are relishing, digestive, laxative and alleviate vāta. [296-304]

हृद्रोगपाण्डुरोगघ्नं प्लीहातपगुल्मनाशनम् । कासं कफजगुल्मांश्च यावशूकं व्यपोहति ॥३०५॥
तीक्ष्णोष्णो लघुरुक्षश्च क्लेदी पच्यति पाचते । दाहनो दीपनश्छेदी सर्वः क्षारोऽग्निसन्निभः ॥३०६॥

Yāvasūka (alkali derived from the awns of barley) relieves of heart disease,
anaemia, grahaṇīroga, spleen enlargement, hardness in bowels, throat troubles, cough
caused by kapha and piles.

All alkali are sharp, hot, rough, moistening, digestive, rupturing, burning, appe-
tiser, cutting and like fire. [305-306]

कारवी कुञ्चिकाजाजी यवानी धान्यतुम्बुरु । रोचनं दीपनं स्वादु वातकफद्वर्ग्धनाशनम् ॥३०७॥

Kāravī, kuñcikā, ajājī, yavānī, dhānya and tumburu–these are relishing, appe-
tiser, and alleviate vāta, kapha and foul smell. [307]

आहारयोगिनः केचिद्भक्तिभेदा न तु विद्यते । समासतो द्वादशायं वर्ग आहारयोगिनाम् ॥३०८॥

There is no certainty or limitation of the attachment to (particular) adjuvents of food.
Thus ends the twelfth group of the adjuvents of food. [308]

शूकधान्यं समीचीनं समपूर्वाप्तं प्रशस्यते । पुराणं प्रायशो रूक्षं नवं श्लेष्मकरं गुरु ॥३०९॥
यत्फालकृष्ठितं विद्दं त्वरिलघुप्ररूढं शुकम् । निष्पृक्तं भृष्टिपूतं च शमीं लघु विपच्यते ॥३१०॥

Cereals and legumes are recommended for use when they are one year old. The
old one is mostly rough while the new one is mostly heavy. The crop which comes
shortly is regarded as lighter. The legumes, when dehusked and properly fried digest
easily. [309-310]

मृतं कृशं वातिस्निग्धं वृद्धं बालं विषेण वा । अगोचरभुतं व्यालहतं मांसमपोहयेत् ॥३११॥
अतोऽन्यथा हितं मांसं वृद्धिबलकरं परम् ।

Meat of animals who died natural death, are emaciated, too much fatty, old,
young, killed by poisons, not maintained on pasture graze and bitten by snakes, tigers
etc. should be discarded. Meat of animals other than the above is wholesome, and
promotes bulk as well as strength of the body. [311]

प्रीणनः सर्वभूतानां हृद्यो मांसरसः परम् ॥३१२॥
शुष्यतां व्याधिमुक्तानां कृशानां क्षीणरेतसाम् । वलसौख्यमिनीयीणां च एव रसं विद्याद्रसायनम् ॥३१३॥
सर्वरोगशमनं यावाषां विहितं रसम् । विद्याच् सर्वं बलकरं बुद्धिवृद्धिविवर्धनम् ॥३१४॥
व्यायामिनीनां खलित्या मद्वात्यादां ये रसाः । नित्यं मांसरसाहारा नातुराः शूरा दुर्बलाः ॥३१५॥
