222                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

For all living beings, meat soup is nourishing and cordial. This is regarded as
nectar for those suffering from phthisis, during convalescence, for the emaciated,
those having diminished semen and desirous of strength and lustre. Meat soup prepared
accordingly alleviates all diseases. It promotes voice and strength of age, intelligence,
sense organs and life. The persons indulged in physical exercise, women and wine do
not fall ill or become weak if they take diet with meat soup regularly. [312-315]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on vegetables]

Vegetable which is affected by insects, wind and the sun, dried, old, unseasonal,
not cooked with fat and unfiltered should be discarded.

The fruit which is old, unripe, damaged by insects, animals, snow and the sun,
grown is unnatural place and time, and rotted is unfit (for use).

Instructions regarding salads are according to the respective items except cook-
ing. As regards fermented liquors, water and milk products, the same have been men-
tioned in the respective groups. [316-318]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on after-drink]

The drinks taken after meals should be contrary to the properties of food but
not so to dhātus. Eighty four āsavas and water-drinkable and undrinkable-have
already been mentioned, one should take the wholesome afterdrink after examining
properly.

In vāta, unctuous and hot (afterdrink) is suitable; in pitta, sweet and cold; in
kapha, rough and hot and in wasting meat soup is the best after-drink. For those ex-
hausted by fasting, travelling on foot, speech, traffic in women, wind, the sun and
evacuative measures, the afterdrink of milk is wholesome as nectar. Wine should be
prescribed as afterdrink for the lean and thin for promoting corpulence. For reducing the
obese persons, honey-water is recommended. For those having mild appetite, loss of
sleep due to drowsiness, anxiety, fear and exhaustion, particularly for those who are
accustomed to wine and meat, wine is recommended as after-drink. [319-324]
