230                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: verses on diseases of māṃsa, rakta, medas, asthi]

The diseases, mentioned above, are produced by various unwholesome food–
eaten, drunk, licked and devoured. In order to prevent their occurrence, the wise
should always take wholesome food so that the disorders caused by them may not arise.

The remedy of disorders produced in rasa consists of all types of reducing meas-
ures. The treatment of the blood disorders has already been said in the chapter on
properly formed blood. The disorders of māṃsa are treated with evacuative measures,
surgical measures and application of alkali and cauterization. The treatment of the
disorders of medas is described in the chapter on the eight despicable ones. The reme-
dial measure in the disorders of asthi consists of the five evacuative measures, enema
and intake of bitter-medicated milk and ghee. The therapy of diseases caused in majjā
and śukra consists of the intake of predominantly sweet and bitter food, sexual inter-
course, physical exercise and elimination of doṣas in time and in proper quantity. The
treatment of disorders of sense organs will be mentioned in the chapter on three vital
organs. Likewise, the treatment of the disorders of ligaments etc. will be described in
the chapter on Vātavyādhi. The management of the disorders of malas has been de-
scribed briefly in the chapter on non-suppression of urges and also here and there in
other contexts. [23-30]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on excretions]

Due to exercise, intensity of heat and non-observance of wholesome and also
speediness of vāta, doṣas spread from the belly to the exterior parts. There sometimes
when not excited they wait again and again for the exciting cause because they never
vitiate in improper place or time. [31-32]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on excretory channels]

On the other hand, due to increase, oozing, maturity, cleaning of the channels
and control of vāyu, doṣas leave the extremities and proceed to the belly. [33]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on innate disorders]
