270                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

cooked with pulse), vilepī (paste-like preparation of rice) and sugarcane products,
milk, fresh wine, immature curd and liquids, sweets and fresh substances; abstinence
from cleanliness and physical exercise, indulgence in sleep, lying down and sitting,
and also other (similar) regimens producing kapha, fat and urine. All this constitutes
particular etiology (of kaphaja prameha). [5]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on kapha-doṣa]

The particular doṣa is kapha consisting of abundant fluid. [6]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on kapha-dūṣyas]

Abundant and non-compact medas and muscle; body fluid, semen, blood,
muscle-fat, marrow, lasīkā, rasa and ojas–these are the particular dūṣyas (in
prameha). [7]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on combination of three factors]

By combination of all these three factors (nidāna etc.) kapha gets vitiated imme-
diately because of the predominance of its aggravating factors. When vitiated, it spreads
all over the body immediately due to laxity of body. While spreading at first it gets
mixed up with the fat because fat is abundant, non-compact and similar in properties.
While mixing up kapha affects it morbidly due to its vitiation. Now that vitiated kapha
associated with fat joins with body fluid and muscle because the latter are increased
excessively. Thus affecting the muscle, it produces boils śarāvikā, kacchapikā etc.
due to sloughing of the muscle of abnormality. By affecting the body fluid, trans-
forms it in urine and also blocks the heavy openings of the urinary tubules coming
out from vaṅkṣaṇa (urinary bladder) and basti (kidney) and associated with fat and
fluid. Thus it (kapha) produces the (kaphaja) pramehas and leads to their stability or
incurability, due to abnormality. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on prodromal symptoms]

Prodromal symptoms of these (premehas) due to kapha-pitta-vāta are these such
as–malasāhitvendriyāṇām (sluggishness of sense organs), āsyamādhuryam (sweet-
ness in mouth), karapādasuptatā (numbness in feet and hands), dehacikkaṇatā
(stickiness of body), trṣṇātimātrā (excessive thirst), svedaḥ (perspiration), durgandhaḥ
(foul smell), and so on; the appearance of certain peculiar symptoms which prelude the
onset of disorder. [9]
