290                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: verses on physician's actions]

The best among the physicians should treat the curable types of insanity caused
by doṣas with the methodical measures as said above. [9]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on exogenous insanity]

The type of insanity which is different from the types of the same caused by
doṣas in terms of etiology, prodroma, symptoms, complaints and suitability is said as
exogenous. Some say the inauspicious action done in previous life as its cause. That
also is caused by intellectual error thus said Punarvasu Ātreya. Due to intellectual
error, the person disregarding the gods, sages, forefathers, gandharvas, yakṣas,
rākṣasas, preceptors, elders, accomplished persons, teachers and other respectable
persons behaves unwholesomely, or performs other such inauspicious activities.
Having been inflicted by his own karman he is further inflicted by gods etc. and thus
made insane. [10]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on exogenous insanity onset]

These are the prodromal symptoms of the patient of insanity caused by the wrath
of gods etc.–inclination to violence on gods, cow, brāhmaṇas and ascetics, anginess,
cruel disposition, uneasiness, impairement of ojas, complexion, lustre, strength and
body, in dreams reproaching and incitement by gods etc. thereafter manifestation of
insanity. [11]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on initiation symptoms]

These are the different features of initiation of insanity in the subject by the
insanity-producing agents such as the gods produce insanity by their looking, precep-
tors, elders, accomplished persons and the great sages by cursing, forefathers by op-
posing (themselves), gandharvas by touching, yakṣas by entering, rākṣasas by getting
their odour smelled and piśācas by riding and driving. [12]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on kaphaja]

By certain reasons such as–avoidance of wholesome regimen and behaviour;
animal-like nature, malice etc.
