VIII]                         NIDĀNASTHĀNA                                  297

One cause produces several disorders or sometimes only one. Likewise, one
disorder is caused by many factors and sometimes many disorders are caused by
those ones. For instance, from rough substances arise fever, giddiness, delirium etc.
and sometimes fever only. Likewise, many factors such as rough etc. cause only
fever while sometimes they produce many disorders in addition to fever. [24-26]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on symptoms]

One symptom pertains to many diseases as well as one disease. Likewise, many
symptoms arise in one disease as well as many diseases. For instance, fever is the
(common) symptom of many diseases having irregular onset and complicated origin
while hyperpyrexia is the symptom of fever only. Many symptoms relate to irregu-
lar onset and complicated origin are found in fever while the same are observed also
in several diseases like fever, dyspnoea, hiccup etc. [27-29]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on management]

One pacificatory measure is useful in many disorders as well as in single disor-
der. Likewise, many measures are required for a single disorder as well as multiple
ones. For instance, the single reducing therapy pacifies many disorders arisen from
āmāśaya and sometimes single disease (fever) responds to the single therapy (reduc-
ing one). Likewise, several measures light diet etc. are prescribed in fever alone while
all these are applied in several disorders. [30-32]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on curable diseases]

Easily curable disease is cured with easy means and in a short time. Disease
curable with difficulty requires great effort and long duration for cure. Palliable dis-
eases which are incurable are not eradicated. The other type of incurable disease, the
rejectable one, fails to respond to all measures. [33-35]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on physician's observation]

The learned physician should observe the states of aggravation, normalcy and

43 C.S. - I
