306                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Rāśi (quantity) consists of sarvagraha (total account) and parigraha (individual
account) which ascertain the results of the food taken in proper and improper quan-
tity. The accounting of the quantity of the entire food taken in totality is sarvagraha while
parigraha is that of the individual items in food. Thus, accouting of the entire is
sarvagraha while that from all angles is parigraha. (4)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on deśa]

Deśa denotes place relating to growth as well as distribution of the substances
and also the suitability in respect of place. (5)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on kāla]

Kāla is eternally moving (time) as well as conditional. The conditional one is
related to disorder while the eternally moving one to seasonal disturbances. (6)

[Devanagari unclear: verses on upayogasaṃsthā]

Upayogasaṃsthā denotes the rules for dieting. This depends on the digested
(food). (7)

[Devanagari unclear: verses on consumer (upayoktā)]

Upayoktā is that who consumes the food. On him depends the specific factors of the method
of dieting. [22]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on factors having good or bad effects]

The characters of the (factors) having good or bad results are mutually bene-
factors. One should try to understand them and thereafter desire for the wholesome
only. Food or any other thing which is liked but is unwholesome and with unpleasant
consequences should not be used by ignorance or carelessness. [23]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on prescribed method of dieting]

This is the prescribed method of dieting for the healthy and the sick (in certain
cases) who take wholesome food timely and usually–one should eat warm, unctuous,
in proper quantity, after the previous food is digested, non-antagonistic, in favourable
place, with all the favourable accessories, not too fast, not too slow, not while talking
or laughing and with full concentration after due consideration to the self. [24]
