VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  321

Hence because both types of causes are observed one-sided view is not correct.
(I) will explain it with examples. If there be determined life-span for all there would
not be any necessity to apply mantras, herb-roots, gems, auspicious rites, offerings,
gifts, oblations, observance of rules, expiation, fasting, blessings, bowing, visit to
temples etc. with a desire for longevity nor there be any need to avoid excited, fierce
and moving cows, elephants, camels, asses, horses, buffalows and terrific winds etc.
Likewise, one should not abstain from water falls, mountains, uneven and difficult
places and strong water current, from careless, insane, excited, fierce and unstable
persons and those inflicted with confusion and greed; from enemies, from furious
fire, from various poisonous reptiles, serpents etc. from over-exertion, from behaviour
unsuited to place and time, and from king's wrath, because these and other similar
factors should not be destructive because of entire life having determined span. More-
over, the living beings who have not practised the alleviative measures against the
happening of untimely death should not be subjected to such happening; all the talks
of great sages for initiation and knowledge of application in the chapter of rasāyana
would be useless; even Indra should not be able to kill with thunderbolt his enemy
with determined life-span; why should Aświns treat the patient with therapeutic meas-
ure? Why should the great sages try to obtain the desired life-span by penance? It
would also not be necessary for the great sages along with the lord of gods (Indra),
who already know the worth knowing, to see, to instruct and to behave properly.

Excellent among all the visions is the one pertaining to Indra, even that is pos-
sessed by us as well, with this it is observed like this–there is dissimilarity in life-
span of thousands of persons who are bound not indulged in fighting battles; simi-
larly in those who counteract or do not counteract the disease immediately after
it is arisen; there is also dissimilarity in life-span of those who take poison or not;
there is no similar fate of the jars carrying water and those in pictures (or kept
only for decoration). Hence wholesome regimen is the basis of life and the contrary
is that of death. Over and above, orderly and proper use of food and activities
which are contrary to the properties of place, time and self, abstaining from exces-

46 C.S. - I
