322                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

sive, negative and perverted use in respect of all (time, action and senses), holding
up of psychic excesses (emotions), non-suppression of impelled natural urges, avoid-
ance of over-exertion we take these as the cause for continuance of health and ac-
cordingly also instruct and observe properly. [36]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on Lord Ātreya's reply]

Thereafter Agniveśa said–O Lord! when the people have undetermined life-span
how there is timely or intimely death? [37]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on Lord Ātreya's reply]

Lord Ātreya replied–O Agniveśa! Listen. An axle fitted in a vehicle which is
endowed with all the natural qualities carries on and perishes in time by depreciation
of its normal limit; similarly, the life-span in a body of a person having strong consti-
tution and managed properly gets its end and loss of its normal limit. Such death is
(known as) timely. (On the other hand), the same axle gets destroyed in the way due
to overload, uneven road, want of road, breaking of wheels, defects in vehicle or driver,
separation of the bolt, non-lubrication and throwing about, similarly the life-span comes
to an end in the middle due to over-exertion, diet not in accordance with agni, irregu-
lar meals, complicated body postures, over-indulgence in sexual intercourse,
company of ignoble persons, suppreression of impelled urges, non-suppression
of suppressable urges, infliction with organisms, poisonous winds and fire, injury
and avoidance of food and medicaments, such death is (known as) untimely. More-
over, the death occurred in cases of fever etc. due to faulty management is also
untimely. [38]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on cooling regimen for fever]

Again Agniveśa put a query–O Lord! why do the physicians administer mostly
hot water rather than cold one inspite of the fact that there is also doṣa involved in
etiology of fever which is amenable to cooling regimen. [39]
