332                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on srotas affection causes]

Here are the verses–

Prāṇavaha srotas are affected due to wasting, suppression of urges, roughness,
physical exercise, during hunger and severe factors.

Udakavaha srotas are affected due to heat, āma, fear, drinking, use of dry food
and suppression of thirst.

Annavaha srotas are affected due to intake of food in excessive quantity, untimely
and which is unwholesome and derangement of agni.

Those who eat heavy, cold, too unctuous and in excessive quantity and do ex-
cessive mental work suffer from the morbidity of rasavaha srotas.

Those who take food and drinks as causing burning, unctuous, hot and liquid
and also exposure to the sun and fire suffer from the morbidity of raktavaha srotas.

Those who take channel-blocking, bulky and heavy food and also sleep during
day suffer from the morbidity of māṃsavaha srotas.

Medovaha srotas are affected due to lack of physical exercise, day-sleep, exces-
sive intake of fatty food and alcoholic drinks.

Asthivaha srotas are affected due to (excessive) physical exercise, too much jerk-
ing; excessive rubbing of bones and constant use of vāta-aggravating factors.

Majjāvaha srotas are affected due to crushing, excessive bash, injury, compres-
sion and constant use of antagonistic food.

Śukravaha srotas are affected due to sexual act in improper time and nonvaginal
track, suppression of discharge of semen, excessive coitus and (faulty) application of
surgery, alkali and agni (cauterization).

Mūtravaha srotas are affected due to use of water, food and coitus during urge
for micturation, suppression of urga for mictruration particularly in persons wasted
and wounded.

Purīṣavaha srotas are affected due to holding up of the urge for defaection, over-
eating, eating during indigestion and when previous meal is not digested, particularly
in person with poor digestion and who are lean and thin.
