VII]                          VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  341

A part of the means of knowlege is not able to provide understanding of the
entire object. Those who fail to diagnose a case also fail to prescribe a rational rem-
edy for the same. (For instance) when they take severely diseased as mildly diseased
and considering a little morbidity administer mild evacuative drug which further ag-
gravates the doṣas. (Likewise) when they take the mildly diseased as the severely
diseased and considering great morbidity administer strong evacuative drug which
harms the body by over-eliminating the doṣas. Thus those who regard the part of the
means of knowledge as sufficient to provide knowledge of the entire object, fail in
their pursuit. (On the other hand) the physicians who know from all the aspects, never
confuse if they take action after examining the entire situation by all means as far as
possible and thus achieve the desired objective. [4]

भवति चात्र–

[Devanagari unclear: verses on inexperienced physicians]

Here are the verses–

The inexperienced physicians confuse in deciding the severity or otherwise
of the disease by seeing only the appearance of the patient having variations due to
psyche etc. These ignorant ones, by administering remedies improperly, cause end of
the patient or some severe trouble. The learned ones, (on the other hand), after obtain-
ing knowledge about the case by all means never slip in administration of remedial
measure. [5-7]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Agniveśa's question]

Thus after having heard the types of the appearance of the diseased, failure of
the ignorant physicians in this respect and its bad consequences, the invariable success
of the learned physicians in the context of the appearance of the diseased, Agniveśa
put query to Lord Ātreya, bowing on his feet, about all parasites inhibiting the persons
in respect of etiology, location, form, colour, name, effect and treatment. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on twenty types of parasites]

Lord Ātreya replied to him–O Agniveśa! Twenty types of pathogenic para-
sites have been mentioned earlier from various points of view except the normal
