344                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Now extraction is removal effected by hands with or without the help of instru-
ments as necessary. Parasites located inside the organs are extracted, as a rule, by the
(eliminative) therapy. This is of four types such as head-evacuation, emesis, purga-
tion and non-unctuous enema. This is the method of extraction. Destruction of the
source of their origin and development consists of the use of pungent, bitter, astrin-
gent, alkaline and hot drugs, and other measures which are contrary to kapha and
faeces. This is about destruction of the source. Thereafter abstinence from the
etiological factors–whatever is mentioned as causative factor and similar other sub-
stance should be avoided. Thus the principle of treatment is said, this is further de-
scribed in detail. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on krimi treatment]

The patient infested with worms should be first treated with unction and fomen-
tation for six or seven nights and a day before administering the evacuative therapy
he should be given diet morning and evening consisting mainly of milk, jaggery, curd,
sesamum, fish, meat of marshy animals, (rice) flour preparation, rice cooked in
milk and kusumbha oil in order to stimulate the worms and impel them to the alimentary
tract. After passing the night, when the patient is comfortable seated and has his
meal properly digested, the evacuative therapy–non-unctuous enema, emesis and pur-
gation–should be administered to bring the same day after examining all the aspects
properly. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on bringing drugs]

The treatment will be mentioned here in brief which will be described in detail
later on. In all parasites first of all their extraction should be done, then destruction of
the source of their origin and development and thereafter abstinence from the etiology
factors. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on kalpasthāna preparations]

Now the patient should be asked to bring the drug–mūlaka, sarṣapa, laśuna,
karañja, śigru, madhuśigru, kharapuṣpā, bhūstṛna, sumukha, surasa, kuṭheraka, gan-
dīra, kālamālaka, parṇāsa, kṣavaka, phañijjaka–all or whichever are available.
When they are brought, they should be cut into pieces, washed well with water, put
