VII]                          VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  345

in well-cleaned cooking pot and after dipping them in cow-urine diluted with half
water they are cooked being stirred constantly with a laddle. When the water is
mostly consumed and the drugs well-extracted the cooking pot should be brought
down and the extract be taken by filtering it properly. The tolerably warm decoction
is added with the paste of the madanaphala pulp, vidaṅga, oil and svarjikā salt and
put into the enema pot and with this non-unctuous enema is to be administered to
the patient properly. This enema may be prepared also with the decoction of arka,
alarka, kuṭaja, āḍhakī, kuṣṭha and kaiḍarya, or of śigru, pīlu, dhānyaka, kaṭukā and
sarṣapa, or of āmalaka, śṛṅgabera, dāruharidrā and nimba, in combination with
madanaphala etc. and is administered to the patient for three or seven days. [17]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on enema effects]

After the last enema has come back the patient should be assured and on the
same. day evacuative drugs acting from both ways be administered to him properly.
Its method is like this. [18]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on aksa]

One akṣa (10 gm.) of the paste of trivṛt mixed with half añjali (80 ml.) decoction
of the madanaphala pulp should be administered to the patient, this eliminates the
noxious material well from both ways. In this way the emetics and purgatives men-
tioned in the kalpa section may be administered after taking into consideration all the
aspects. [18]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on after evacuation]

When the patient is purged well, he should be bathed with the warm decoction
of viḍaṅga and he should use this for all purposes external as well as internal in place
of water constantly; if it is not available, decoction of other pungent, bitter and astrin-
gent drugs or urine or alkalis may be used for bath. After bath he should be admitted
to a room which is free from wind and should be managed with dietitic regimen
starting with yavāgu (liquid gruel) cooked with pippalī, pippalīmūla, cavya, citraka
and śuṇṭhī. In this way when he reaches the stage of vilepī (paste gruel) unctuous
enema should be administered to him with viḍaṅgataila twice or thrice on alternate
days. [19]

49 C.S. - I
