VIII]                         VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  355

and excellence of equipments, you should never prescribe medicines for those dis-
liked by the king or disliking the king, disliked by wealthy magnets or disliking
them and for all those who are excessively diseased, wicked; having troublesome
conduct, behaviour and management, have not counteracted the censures and one
nearing death; and also for the ladies in absence of their husbands or guardians, you
should never accept meat offered by the ladies without permission of their husband
or guardian. While entering into the patient's house you should be well-dressed, with head lowered,
having good memory, with stillness, thinking carefully and moving accordingly;
having entered there, you should not engage your speech, mind and sense organs
anywhere except the patient, his well-being and other entities of the patient's body
respectively. The matters of the patient's house should not be disclosed outside, even
though you know the diminution in life-span of the patient you should not mention it
where it is liable to cause harm to the patient or others. Even though you are learned
enough, you should not boast too much for your knowledge because mostly the people
become irritated for the excessive boasting even it comes from authority. [13]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on Āyurveda devotion]

There is no end of Āyurveda (science of life), hence one should devote him-
self to it constantly and without any negligence. This is worth-doing. Further one
should learn without jealousy excellence of conduct even from the enemies be-
cause for the wise the world is teacher while for the unwise it is enemy. Hence the
wise, after due consideration, should hear and implement the advice which is thank-
ful, promoting fame, life span, strength and popularity even it comes from an
enemy. Thereafter he should speak this–you should always behave properly to
gods, fire, brāhmaṇas, preceptor, elders, accomplished ones and teacher. Thus
fire alongwith all the perfumes, eatables, gems and grains and aforesaid gods
would bless you with prosperity, otherwise they would curse you. When the teacher
