362                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on Siddhānta]

Siddhānta-Siddhānta (theory) is the conclusion which is established by scien-
tists after testing in several ways and on proving it with reasoning. This is of four
types–sarvatantra siddhānta, pratitantra siddhānta, adhikaraṇa siddhānta and
abhyupāgama siddhānta. Sarvatantra-siddhānta (universal theory) is that which is
accepted universally by all the schools such as–there are causes, there are diseases
and there are remedies for the curable disorders. Pratitantra siddhānta (restricted
theory) is that which is not universal in nature and is held by only one of the schools
such as–in other schools there are eight rasas but here are six; here are the five sense
organs while in other texts there are six sense organs, in other texts all diseases are
taken as caused by vāta etc. but here they are taken as caused by vāta etc. as well as
bhūtas. Adhikaraṇa siddhānta (implied theory) is that which is proved as implication
of some other statement such–as fruits of action, emancipation, self and the other
world are proved in implied way from the statement 'the emancipated does not take
up the consequent action because of the absence of desires'. Abhyupāgama siddhānta
(hypothetical theory) is that which is held up by physicians temporarily and
hypothetically during debate though the idea is unproved, untested, uninstructed
and irrational–such as–'I will speak proposing that dravya is predominant or properties
are predominant or vīrya is predominant. Thus is the four-fold theory. [37]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on śabda]

Śabda–Śabda (word) is an aggregate of letters. This is of four types–dṛṣṭārtha,
adṛṣṭārtha, satya and anṛta. Dṛṣṭārtha (with observable meaning)–is that which
connotes observable meanings; such as doṣas are aggravated by these etiological
factors, they are pacified by six therapeutic measures, the sense objects (sound
etc.) are perceived if the sense organs (auditory etc.) are existent. Adṛṣṭārtha (with
