VIII]                         VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  373

Instrument is the medicament. Medicament is that which serves as equipment
for the physician for effecting balance of dhātus particularly with proper attendance
from the entities ending with procedure (original source, inclination, place, time and
procedure). From the point of view of agents employed, medicament or therapy is of
two types–spiritual and rational. In spiritual therapy incantation, roots, gems,
auspicious rites, offerings, gifts, oblations, observance of rules, expiation, fasting,
blessings, bowing, visit to temples etc. are employed. In rational therapy, evacuative
and pacificatory measures as well as fruitful activities are employed. It is again of
two types according to form–material and non-material. The non-material therapy
includes upāyas (devices other than drugs). Upāya means formless entity like
terrorising, creating surprise, forgetfulness, agitation, exhilaration, chiding,
threatening for murder, binding, inducing sleep, gentle massage etc. It also includes the
aforesaid means of treatment. The material therapy consists of drugs which are used for
emesis etc. The drug is examined in respect of nature (natural composition), properties,
action, habit, time and mode of collection, storage, processing, dosage, indications for
use, the constitution of the patient, and the effect on disorder, whether eliminates it or
pacifies it, any other drug of this type should have the same characters. [87]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on imbalance of dhātus]

The original source is imbalance of dhātus, which is known by the emergence
of the disorder. Examination of this and the material cause of the disorder (doṣas)
consists of the observation of the characters of their diminution or aggravation
and also of those denoting curability, incurability, mildness and severity of the
disorder. [88]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on balance of dhātus]

The act is equilibrium of dhātus which is indicated by alleviation of the
disorder. Its examination (is done) on the following criteria)–alleviation of the
disorder, normalcy of voice and complexion, development of body, increase in
strength, desire for food, relish at the meal time, proper and timely digestion of
