VIII]                         VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  377

Vāta is rough, light, mobile, abundant, swift, cold, coarse and non-slimy. Due
to roughness the persons with predominance of vāta have rough, undeveloped and
short body; continuosly rough, weak, low, adhered and hoarse voice and vigils; due
to lightness light and unsteady movement, activities, diet and speech; due to mobility
unstable joints, eye brows, jaw, lips, tongue, head, shoulder, hands and feet; due to
abundance talkativeness and abundance of tendons and venous network; due to
swiftness hasty initiation, quick irritation and disorder, quick in fear, attachment
and disenchantment, quick in acquisition but with a poor memory (retention); due
to coldness intolerance to cold, continuously infliction with cold, shivering and
stiffness, due to coarseness coarse hairs, beard-mustaches, small hairs, nail, teeth,
face, hands and feet; due to non-sliminess cracked body parts and constant sound
in joints during movement. Because of presence of these qualities the persons
having predominance of vāta have mostly low degree of strength, life-span,
progeny, means and wealth. [98]

संसर्गात् संसृष्टलक्षणाः ॥९९॥

Due to combination of doṣas, characters are found accordingly. [99]

सर्वगुणसमुदितास्तु समधातवः । इत्येवं प्रकृतितः परीक्षेत ॥१००॥

In persons having equilibrium of all dhātus the characters of all of them are
found. Thus one should examine in respect of constitution. [100]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on vikṛti]

A patient has to be examined in respect of vikṛti as well. Vikṛti is vikāra (disor-
der) or pathological manifestation. The disorder should be examined in terms of the
strength of cause, doṣa, dūṣya, constitution, place, time and also by
symptoms, because the severity of disease can not be known without knowing the
strength of cause etc. The disease having strength similar to that of dūṣya, constitution,
place and time alongwith great strength of cause and severity of symptoms is taken as
