VIII]                         VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  381

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on Pramāṇa]

One should also examine by measurement. The measurement of the body
(anthropometry) will be described by the measure of individual fingers in terms of
height, breadth and length respectively. Feet are four (H.) six (B) and fourteen (L.)
fingers; shanks are eighteen fingers long and with sixteen fingers circumference;
knees four fingers long with sixteen fingers circumference, thighs eighteen fingers
(long) with thirty fingers circumference; testicles six fingers long with eight fingers
circumference; penis six fingers long with five fingers circumference; vulva with
twelve fingers circumference; waist sixteen fingers broad, bastiśīra ten fingers,
abdomen ten fingers broad and twelve fingers long; sides ten fingers broad and twelve
fingers long interval between the breasts twelve fingers, margins of the breasts two
fingers, chest twenty four fingers broad and seven fingers high, (apex of the) heart
two fingers, blades six fingers, arms sixteen fingers (long), forearms fifteen fingers
(long); hands twelve fingers (long), axillae eight fingers, sacral region twelve fingers
high, back eighteen fingers high, neck four fingers high with twenty two fingers
circumference; face twelve fingers high with twenty four fingers circumference; mouth
five fingers; chin, lips, ears, middle of the eyes, nose and forehed four fingers; head
sixteen fingers high with thirty two fingers circumference. Thus measurement of body
parts is said separately. The entire body measures eighty four fingers in height and
also in breadth (with both the hands extended). The persons having normal
measurement of the body are endowed with longevity, strength, immunity, happiness,
supremacy, wealth and other desired qualities. Those having body with less or more
measurement have qualities contrary to these. [117]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on sātmya]

One should also examine in respect of sātmya (suitability). Suitable is that
which being used constantly has wholesome effect, those suited to ghee, milk, oil
and meat-soup, and to all rasas are strong, enduring and long-lived. On the
contrary, those suited to rough diet and single rasa are often weak, un-enduring
