384                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

For the knowledge of the measure of life-span, the characters will be described
in the indriya section and the chapter on jātisūtrīya (Śārīra-8). [124]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on time]

Time is the year as well as the status of the patient. The year is divided into
two, three, six, twelve or even more parts according to the nature of action (to be
taken). Now, dividing it into six, the action will be said. Hemanta (early winter),
grīṣma (summer) and varṣā (rainy season) these are the three seasons character-
ised by cold, heat and rains. In between them there are other three seasons having
common characters such as–prāvṛt (early rains), śarad (autumn) and vasanta
(spring). Prāvṛt denotes the early rains, varṣā is the continuation of the same.
Thus these six divisions of seasons have been made for the purpose of evacuative
therapy. [125]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on evacuative therapy]

Evacuative therapy such as emesis etc. is applied in seasons having common char-
acters and are stopped in extreme seasons. The seasons having common characters are
the most convenient ones and unharmful to body and drugs because of moderate cold,
heat and rains, while others, due to excessive cold, heat and rains are inconveneint
ones and harmful to body and drugs. [126]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on seasonal effects]

During hemanta (early winter) the body is afflicted by excessive cold and as
such is distressed, exposed to excessively cold wind, is too much roughened, and
with doṣas adhered; on the other hand, the drugs administered for evacuation are hot
by nature which become mild in potency due to exposure to excessively cold wind.
Hence in conjunction of both these, the evacuative therapy becomes ineffective and
the body is inflicted with the complications of vāta.

During the summer season, the body afflicted by excessive heat becomes dis-
tressed, exposed to excessively hot winds, too much lax and with excessively liqui-
fied doṣas; the drugs, on the other hand, administered for evacuation being hot in
nature become more intense because of exposure to heat; hence in conjunction of both
these, the evacuative therapy produces effects in excess and the body also gets com-
plication of thirst.

During the rainy season, when sky is pervaded with cloud and water, the sun,
the moon and the stars are hidden and there are torrential rains. The earth is covered
with mud and water; the body of living beings is moistened and the entire herbal
wealth is damaged in nature, the evacuative measures become dull in action and the
human bodies sluggish in recovery due to exposure to wind associated with moisture
and clouds.

Therefore, the measures like emesis etc. are stopped in the season ending with
the rains (early winter, summer and rainy seasons) except in case of emergency. In
emergency too, one should administer the therapy with great care after modifying the
seasonal effects sufficiently by artificial means producing qualities contrary to the
season, and by making the measure appropriate in standard potency with variations
in combination, processing and quantity. [127]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on timely or untimely action]

The status of the patient is also called as timely or untimely in relation to the
act being performed or not such as, in a certain condition one drug is untimely,
and the other one is timely. This is also due to specific condition. Defining the
nomenclature of 'kāla' (timely) and 'akāla' (untimely) is given to the conditions
of the patient. This is examined like this–the physician should observe all the
conditions of the patient again and again in order to administer the correct therapy.

54 C.S. - I
