392                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on astringent group]

udumbara, aśwattha, bhallātakāsthi, aśmantaka, śirīṣa, śiṃśapā, somavalka, tinduka,
priyāla, badara, khadira, saptaparṇa, aśwakarṇa, syandana, arjuna, arimeda, elavāluka,
paripelava, kadamba, śallakī, jiṅginī, kāśa, kaśeruka, rājakaśeruka, kapīṭhala, vamśa,
padmaka, aśoka, śāla, dhava, sarja, bhūrja, śaṇa, kharapuṣpā, guggulu, śamī, macika,
varaka, tunga, ajakarṇa, sphūrjaka, bibhītaka, kumbhī, puṣkarabīja, lotus stem, lotus
stalk, tender parts of tāla and kharjūra–these and other similar drugs of the astrin-
gent group should be taken and after cutting and breaking them into small pieces and
washing be cooked with water. The product when lukewarm should be added with
honey, oil and salt and be used for enema in disorders of kapha according to proce-
dure by the expert. In paittika disorders the same should be used while cold and
added with honey and ghee. Thus ends the astringent group. [44]

तत्र श्लोकाः–

Here are the verses–

[Devanagari unclear: verses on six groups]

The six groups enumerated here according to rasas should be known as applica-
ble in all disorders in the form of non-unctuous enema. The non-unctuous enema em-
ployed in diseases according to the respective procedures by the learned physician
controls all diseases. [145-146]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on kaphajadiseases]

The groups of drugs which are not indicated in certain disorders should be con-
sidered as those aggravating the same. Thus six groups of non-unctuous enema are
described dividing them according to rasas. [147-148]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on physician's caution]

The wise physician should eliminate the drug if it is not appropriate even if
enumerated in the group and should add the appropriate one even if is unmentioned.
(If situation arises) a group may be combined with another or several other groups
based on reasoning. The aphorism, though small, is able to provide wide knowl-
edge to the wise like the alms of a mendicant or seed of a farmer. The aphorism
