422                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

universal forms and actions, unmanifest, beginningless as well as endless and without
any transformation. He entering into the uterus and combining with sperm and ovum
produces himself in the form of embryo that is why the embryo is called as 'the self'
The birth of that self is not possible because of his beginninglessness. Hence (both
the statements that) he produces the unborn embryo while born and unborn are in-
correct. The same foetus by the lapse of time attains the stages of childhood, youth
and old age gradually. During the stage which he exists in, he is called as born (or
become) while during the preceding stage he was would be born (or become). In this
way, he is both born and unborn simultaneously. Where both these–bornness and
unbornness–are present he is to produced while born and the same in future conditions
produces himself while unborn. In fact, birth is only transformation in respect of age
and conditions. For instance, in spite of sperm, ovum and the self, they do not attain
the state of embryo until they are combined together; this comes into existence by
combination. Similarly, the same person does not attain fatherhood before the birth of
progeny which thereafter does. In the same way, the embryo, though existing, is said
as born or unborn in respective stages. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on parents not effecting at pleasure]

Mother, father or the self are not able to effect at pleasure in respect of all enti-
ties of the embryo. Somewhat they do by themselves and there under the influence
of the past deed, at some places their instruments are potent while at others they are
not. Where there is excellence of instruments like psyche etc. they produce effect at
pleasure according to strength otherwise the results are contrary It does not mean
that due to defect of instrument, the self himself has no effective role in production
of embryo because the knowers of the self have observed that the desired species,
supreme power and emancipation are dependent on the self. There is none else who
wants himself to be like this or even better. (9) The embryo while being born can not be produced by the
factor other than the self. The sprout can not grow from non-seed (that which does
not posses the character of seed). [9]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on suitability action]

If, in the case of self, suitability is invariably absent, then through senses, mind
and intellect–these instruments alone, the self performs cognition of pleasure, pain,
desire, aversion etc. (10)
