VI]                          ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   451

After Lord Ātreya concluded his talk, Agniveśa said–I heard whatever you said
about the body. (further kindly enlighten us as to) what part of the foetus arises first
in the womb? how does it lie inside the womb and whither faced? On what food is it
sustained? In what state does it come out? By what food and management does it die
immediately after birth? By what does it grow being free from disorders? Whether it
is affected by the disorders caused by wrath of gods etc. ? What is your maximum
life-span? What are the factors leading to maximum life-span? [20]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on different sages' opinions]

After Agniveśa finished his queries, Lord Punarvasu said–it has already been
said in the chapter on the descent into embryo as to how it arises in the womb
and what organs appear and when? (Regarding your first query) There are vari-
ous types of controversy among the sages who composed the aphorisms. Now
understand what I tell you. The in the womb, head manifests first:–This is the view
of Kumāraśirā Bharadwāja because that is the seat of all the sense organs.
Kāṅkāyana, the physician from Bāhlīka, says–'Heart (arises first) because of being
the seat of consciousness. Bhadrakāpya said–'Navel (arises first) because it is
the passage for ingestion of nutrition. Bhadraśaunaka said–'Ano-rectum (arises
first) because it is the seat of vāyu. Badiśa said–'limbs (hands & feet) arise first
because they are instruments of the person. Janaka from Videha said–'sense or-
gans (arise first) because they are the seat of knowledge. Mārīci Kāśyapa said–
'it is incomprehensible because of its being out of direct observation. Dhanwantari
said–'all organs appear simultaneously. The Dhanvantari's view is correct
because all organs such as heart etc. appear simultaneously. All organs of
the foetus are rooted in heart and also some other entities are located there,
there can be no appearance of other entities earlier than heart so simultaneous
