460                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

the standard of the individual's own añjali, of fluid which if discharged accompanies
faeces, urine, blood or other dhātus, circulating in the entire body is held up by the
outermost layer of the skin, beneath the skin exists as lymph exuding through wounds;
under influence of heat goes out of the hair follicles as sweat. Nine añjals of the first
dhātu being product of food and which is known as rasa; eight añjalis of blood, seven
of faeces, six of kapha, five of pitta, four of urine, three of muscle-fat, two of fat, one
of bone marrow, half añjali each of brain substance, semen and ojas which is of the
nature of kapha. Thus in essence the body is described. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on body parts]

The body part which is particularly thick, stable, massive, heavy, coarse and
hard; and nails, bones, teeth, flesh, skin, faeces, hairs, beards and mustaches, skin
hairs, tendons etc. alongwith smell and olfactory sense are pārthiva (predominant
in pṛthivī mahābhūta). The liquid, mobile, dull, unctuous, soft and slimy; rasa,
blood, muscle-fat, kapha, pitta, urine, sweat etc. alongwith taste and gustatory sense
are āpya (predominant in ap mahābhūta); pitta, heat, lustre alongwith vision and
visual sense are āgneya (predominant in agni mahābhūta); respiration, twinkling
of eye, contraction and relaxation, movement, propulsion and retention alongwith
touch and tactile sense are vāyavīya (predominant in vāyu mahābhūta); the vacant
space, big and small channels, alongwith sound and auditory sense are āntarīkṣa
(predominant in ākāśa mahābhūta). Whatever impels is the principal one (principle
of consciousness) alongwith intellect and mind. Thus enumeration of the body parts
is done grossly. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on division]

The body components according to division in smallest units (cells) are innumer-
able due to over-abundance, over-minuteness and trancending perception. The causa-
tive agent in conjunction and disjunction of cells is vāyu and also the nature of activi-
ties. [17]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on attachment]
