468                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on factors damaging foetus]

These are the factors which damage the foetus–such as the foetus dies in the
womb or comes out prematuraly or is dried up if the pregnant woman sits on
roughened, uneven or hard seat; suppresses the urge of wind, urine and faeces,
undergoes strenuous and unsuitable physical exercises, takes excessively sharp
and hot food or eats very little. The foetus is also delivered untimely by injury,
compression, frequent looking at ditches, wells and waterfalls, travelling on a
conveyance with excessive jerking or hearing unliked words or too much noise.
If she constantly lies down in supine position, the umbilical cord gets twisted
around the neck of the foetus. The woman sleeping in open place and moving out
in night gives brith to an insane; if she indulges in quarrels and fights, the progeny
will be epileptic. One indulged in sexual intercourse to ill-physiqued, shameless
and devoted to women; one always under grief to timid, undeveloped or short-
lived; one thinking ill of others to harmful, envious or devoted to women; the
thief to exerting, wrathful or inactive; the intolerant to fierce, deceitful and jealous;
one who sleeps constantly to drowsy, unwise and deficient in digestive power;
one who takes wine constantly to thirsty, poor in memory and unstable in mind;
one using mostly the meat of iguana to an offspring afflicted with gravels, stone
or śanairmeha; one using pork mostly to the offspring having red eyes, obstructed
respiration and very rough body hairs; one using fish constantly to the offspring
with delayed closure of eyes or stiff eyes; one using the sweet things constantly to
the offspring suffering from diabetes, dumb or over-obese; one using sour things
constantly the offspring suffering from internal haemorrhage and diseases of skin
and eyes; one using salt constantly to the offspring affected with early wrinkles
and grey hairs or baldness; one using pungent things constantly to weak, deficient
in semen and sterile; one using bitters constantly to consumptive, weak and unde-
veloped; one using astringents constantly to blackish progeny suffering from hard-
ness of bowels or udāvarta. The pregnant woman gives birth to a child suffering
mostly from the respective disorders the etiological factors of which are used by
her. The paternal defects in respect of semen should be understood on the lines of
the mismanagement concerning mother. Thus the factors causing damage to foe-
tus are said. Hence the woman desiring excellent progeny should particularly ab-
stain from the unwholesome diet and behaviour. Observing good conduct, she
should manage herself with wholesome diet and behaviour. [21]
