474                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Ātreya does not approve it. He says that due to pressure of the foetus vāta, pitta and
kapha reaching the chest give rise to burning sensation, then itching which in turn
causes kikkisa (streaking of skin). To ameliorate this condition, she should take in
food times butter processed with sweet drugs alongwith the decoction of kola (ju-
jube). Besides, her breast areola should be massaged gently with the paste of sandal
and lotus stalk; or the powder of dhātakī, mustard and madhuka; or the paste of kuṭaja,
arjaka seeds, musta and haridrā; or the paste of nimba, kola, tulasī and mañjiṣṭhā; or
triphalā mixed with blood of pṛṣat (spotted deer), deer and rabbit, massage with oil
cooked with karavīra leaves and sprinkling with water processed with jāti and madhuka
should be applied. When itching is felt, scratching of the part should be avoided so
that the skin may not be torn or disfigured. If the itching be intolerable, it may be
overcome by annoiting and rubbing. During the period she should be kept on a diet
consisting of sweet, vāta-alleviating articles, in a small quantity, free from fat and
salt with a little after-drink of water. During the eight month she should take milk
gruel added with ghee in food times. But Bhadrakāpya contradicts it on the plea that it
causes the disorder of paingalya (tawniness) in the foetus. On this Lord Punarvasu
said-the risk of the disorder of paingalya may be there but it does not indicate in any
way that the above regimen should not be applied. (Rather in my opinion), the women
following this remains free from disorders and gives birth to a child endowed with
excellent health, strength, complexion, voice and compactness and the best in the
entire clan. During the ninth month she should be treated with unctuous enema with
the oil cooked with sweet drugs. A swab soaked with the same oil should be placed
inside the vagina to lubricate the seat of foetus as well as the entire genital tract. If the
regimen as mentioned above is followed from the first to the ninth month, it softens
the entities which hold the foetus, womb, waist, sides and back of the woman at the
time of delivery, wind gets in normal course, urine and faeces in normal state get
through the passage easily; skin and nails also become soft, strength and complexion
are improved and she delivers the child as desired, excellent and healthy with ease
and in time. [32]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on maternity home]

Before the ninth month the maternity home should be constructed in a place
freed from bones, gravels and earthen pieces and in a ground having soils of good
