VIII]                        ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   477

mobile state, vāyu impelled by the exercise with the pestle and getting opportunity
may take away the life because the pregnant woman becomes treatable with difficulty
particularly at that time. Hence the holding of pestle is discarded in the view of the
sages while deep breathing and movements may be performed. She should be given
the powder of kuṣṭha, elā, lāṅgalakī, vacā, citraka, cirabilva and cavya to smell
which she should do frequently. Similarly the smoke of the leaves of bhūrja or the
heartwood of śiṃśapā may be inhaled, in between she should be kneaded lightly
after massaging with lukewarm oil in the regions of waist, sides, back and legs. By
this manipulation the foetus moves down. [38]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on cardiac region]

When it is felt that the foetus leaving the cardiac region is entering into (the
lower part of) the abdomen, is being fixed into the brim of the pelvis, the labour
pains are getting intensified and the foetus is moving downwards then at this stage
she should be placed on the cot and be advised to strain. In her ear some favourite
lady should recite the following mantras–"Kṣitirjalam" etc. (May Pṛthivī, Ap, Tejas,
Vāyu, Viṣṇu and Prajāpati always protect you, the pregnant one, and promote the
delivery of the foetus. O having auspicious look! you, the undistressed one, may
deliver the undistressed son having lustre like that of kārttikeya and also protected
by him. [39]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on don'ts during labour]

The women having the said qualities should advise her like this–"do not
strain until the pains appear because who does so her effort goes in vain, moreover,
her progeny becomes abnormal and deformed or afflicted with dyspnoea, cough,
phthisis and spleen. As one does not get or gets with difficulty while making
efforts for the unimpelled urges of sneezing, eructation, flatus, urine and faeces,
similar is the fate of the woman who strains for the delivery of the foetus normally.
