478                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

On the other hand, as the suppression of the impelled urges of sneezing etc. gives
rise to afflictions, the non-straining for the delivery of foetus in time produces
similar results. She should be asked to follow the instruction. Accordingly, initially
she should strain mildly then gradually with stronger effort. While she is straining,
the other women should speak in her ears–'just delivered a worthy son.' Thus she is
filled with joy. [40]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on placenta extraction]

When she has delivered the child, immediately it should be observed whether
the placenta has been expelled or not. In case, it has not come out, one of the attend-
ing women should press strongly above the navel with the right hand and hold her
on the back with the left one and thus shake her body strongly. The pelvic region
should be rubbed with her heel. Her buttocks should be held fastly and be pressed
strongly. The throat and palate should be touched with her hair. The vagina
should be fumigated with the leaves of bhūrja, kācamaṇi and slough of the ser-
pent. She should be asked to drink the paste of kuṣṭha and tālīsa mixing it in the
soup of balwaja or strong spirituous portion of maireya and surā (types of wine),
or the soup of horse gram, or decoction of maṇḍūkaparṇī and pippalī. The paste of
small elā, dewadāru, kuṣṭha, śuṇṭhī, vidaṅga, pippalī, kālāguru, cavya, citraka and
upakuñcikā; or cutting the right ear of the living untamed bull and pounding it on
grinding stone should be kept for an hour in one of the decoctions of balwaja etc;
the liquid portion of this should be administered to the patient. A cotton swab
soaked in the oil prepared with śatapuṣpī, kuṣṭha, madana and hiṅgu should be
placed in her genital tract. Thereafter unctuous enema should be administered to
her. The above liquid preparation added with madanaphala, devadālī, ikṣvāku,
dhāmārgava, kuṭaja, kṛtavedhana and gajapippalī should be used in the form
of non-unctuous enema. This non-unctuous enema leads to expulsion of the
