VIII]                        ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   481

fire burning constantly with the fuel of kaṇakanikā and tinduka wood within the
maternity home. The said attending women and favorite friends should keep up the
whole night near the mother for ten or twelve days. Moreover, gifts, auspicious
rites, blessings, praises, songs, playing musical instruments should be performed
continuously in the home which should be amply provided with food and drinks and
be full of affectionate and happy persons. The brāhmaṇa proficient in the Atharvaveda
too should continuously offer propitiatory oblations to the fire both the times for the
well-being of the child as well as the mother. Thus the protective measures are said. [47]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on hunger and feeding]

When the mother feels hunger one of the fats–ghee, oil, muscle-fat, marrow–
should be given to her according to suitability in the maximum quantity and mixed
with pippalī, pippalimūla, cavya, citraka and śuṇṭhī. After she has taken the fat, her
abdomen should be massaged with ghee and oil and wrapped round with a big clean
cloth bandage so that vāyu may not find space to produce disorder. After the fat is
digested, she should take in proper quantity liquid gruel prepared with pippalī etc.
and added well with unctuous substance. She should take sprinkles with warm water
both the times before the intake of fat and gruel. Thus maintaining for five or seven
days she should be saturated gradually. This is the code of healthy conduct for the
woman having recently delivered. [48]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on disorders]

If any disorder inflicts her during the period, it is curable with difficulty or is
incurable because of the diminution and laxity of all dhātus caused by the growth of
foetus and emptiness due to straining, pain, discharge of fluids and blood. Hence she
should be treated with proper method particularly by applying massage, annointing,
sprinkling, bath, food and drinks prepared with appetiser, vitaliser, bulk-promoting,
sweet and vāta-alleviating drugs because the women having delivered particularly
have vacant body. [49]

66 C.S. - I
