484                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Now (I) will explain the examination of wet-nurse. One should say–'bring the
wet-nurse which belongs to the same caste, in youthful age, submissive, free from
impatience, deformity, addictions, ugliness and loathsomeness; born in a good
place, not mean-minded or indulged in mean acts, born in a good family, having
affectionate disposition towards children, free from diseases, having living male
children, having profuse lactation, free from carelessness, not sleeping on excrements,
not married to a man of lower caste, skillful in management, clean, having dislike for
uncleanliness and endowed with excellence of breasts and breast milk. [52]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on excellence of breasts]

The excellence of breasts consists of breasts not too high, too long or too corpu-
lent; having nipples of appropriate size and easy in suckling. Thus is the excellence of
breasts. [53]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on excellence of breastmilk]

The excellent milk has normal colour, smell, taste and touch; dissolves com-
pletely in water if milked in a water-pot because of its (watery nature). Such milk is
nourishing and health-giving. Thus is the excellence of breastmilk. [54]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on contrary characters]

The breast-milk having contrary characters should be taken as abnormal. The
features are–the breast-milk having blackish or reddish colour, astringent as subsidi-
ary taste, non-sliminess, unmanifest smell; which is rough, thin, frothy, light, non-
saturating, emaciating and causing vātika disorders should be known as affected by
vāta. That which has blue, yellow or coppery colour; bitter, sour or pungent as sub-
sidiary tastes, fleshy or bloody smell, too hot and causing paittika disorders should
be taken as affected by pitta and that which is exceedingly white and sweet, has salty
as subsidiary taste, smell as that of ghee, oil, muscle-fat and bat-marrow, is slimy, thready,
precipitating in water and causing kaphaja disorders should be known as affected by
kapha. [55]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on management]
