514                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on teeth-mucus and patient features]

If the patient, due to abnormality, has teeth white like bones, flowered and cov-
ered as with mud, he does not recover from illness and regain health.

The tongue as stiff, insensitive, heavy, much thorny, blackish, dry or swollen
should be considered as the moving tongue of a ghost.

If a patient takes deep inspiration and shallow expiration with fainting he should
be considered as having obstructed life-span and should be discarded by the wise.

Hands, feet, carotid regions and palate–these parts become excessively cold and
hard or soft at the end of life.

The patient who rubs his one knee with the other one, fells down the legs after
raising them and turns away his face frequently, does not survive.

The patient who cuts his nail tips with teeth, hairs with nails tips and scrapes the
ground with wooden piece does not recover from illness.

One who gnashes teeth while awake, weeps and laughs loudly and does not feel
pain, is not freed from illness.

The patient who beats the cot with leg while laughing, shouting and touching the
upper orifices does not survive. [13-20]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on attendants]

The person expressing his dislike for all those entities which were very much
liked by him previously and is deteriorating should be taken as about to die.

The patient who is about to die has his neck unable to keep the head on, back
unable to take up the weight of his body and jaws unable to bear the morsel of the
mouth.

Sudden rise of temperature in fever, thirst, fainting, debility and dislocation of
joints–these signs indicate death.

If the patient suffering from pralepaka (hectic) type of fever has profuse sweat-
ing on face in early morning, the chances of his survival are rare.

If the food does not reach the pharynx, instead the tongue reaches there and
there is extreme deterioration of strength, it indicates the end of life.
