516                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

The patient whose eyes are blackish, greenish and destroyed should be known
as having reached the end of his life.

The patient who is unconscious having dryness of mouth and full of diseases
should be considered as having obstructed life span and be discarded by the wise.

If the person suffering from paittika disorders has green views, blocked hair fol-
licles, and desire for sour things he succumbs to death.

Pain in scapular regions, hiccup, haemoptysis, hardness of bowels, chest pain
lead the patient of phthisis to death.

In the state of loss of strength and flesh, the diseases like vātavyādhi, epilepsy,
leprosy, oedema, abdominal diseases, gulma, diabetes, phthisis and others become
incurable and as such should be discarded by the physician.

If a patient having been relieved of hardness of bowels by purgation develops
thirst and tympanitis, he should be considered as ghost.

One who, because of excessive dryless of throat, mouth and chest, is unable to
drink anything does not survive.

If a patient develops weakness of voice, diminution of strength and complexion,
and aggravation of disease without an apparent cause, it indicates death.

A wise physician should discard the patient who has developed respiratory fail-
ure, subnormal temperature, pain in groins and does not get any relief. [3-13]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on hallucination]

The patient talking in feeble voice about his own approaching death and having
auditory hallucinations should be discarded from a distance.

If the remission of diseases come suddenly with crisis particularly in a weak
patient, his survival is taken as doubtful by Ātreya.

If the relations of the patient request the physician begging for his life, the phy-
sician should prescribe only the diet with meat soup and should not administer any
evacuative therapy. If, after a month, there be no improvement even on intake of vari-
ous meat soup, his survival is rare. [14-17]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on ant-bite]
