XII]                          INDRIYASTHĀNA                                  525

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on way to patient's house]

Now (I) shall mention the protentous signs observed in the way or patient's house.

Sneezing, crying, slipping, falling, angry expression, beating, refutation, de-
spising; fall or defection of cloth, turban, upper garment, umbrella and shoes; coming
across the people afflicted due to death of somebody, falling down of sacred tree,
flagstaff, flag or pitcher full of water; talking about death or inauspicious things,
pollution with ashes or dust, crossing of road by cat, dog or serpent; cries of cruel
animals and birds facing south, seeing cot, chair and vehicles stretched out-these
have been said as inauspicious by the learned. The wise physician seeing or hearing
these in the way should not proceed to the patient's house. Thus are said the
protentious signs observed in the way which are despised by the physicians.

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on patient's house]

Physician should also observe the protentous condition of the patient's house.
Such as–going out of full pitcher, fire, earth, seed, fruit, ghee, bull, brāhmaṇa, gems,
food and idol of gods while the physician enters; the physician while entering into the
dying patient's house sees the five vessels as broken or flameless. The family mem-
bers of the moribund person use the things which are cut, split, burnt, broken, kneaded
or weak. The patient whose bed, clothes, vehicle, movement, eating and bird's perch-
ing are heard as inauspicious is not curable. The patient whose friends use beds,
clothes, vehicles, or other accessories like dead bodied should himself be treated as
dead. While cooking food for the patient, if the food gets exceedingly damaged or
the fire gets extinguished even though there is no wind and the fuel is sufficient, it
indicates incurability of the patient.

If earthen pots in the patient's house fall down or get broken frequently, the
chances of his survival are rare. [32-39]
