XII]                          INDRIYASTHĀNA                                  529

Auspicious signs in the patient's house are as below–the family members in-
cluding the patient endowed with auspicious conduct, respectful, favourable,
abundance of materials, attainment of wealth, superiority and happiness, acquisition
of the desired object with ease, administration of useful drugs and success thereby;
dreams of climbing on house, palace, hill, riding on elephants, bull, horse and men;
seeing the moon, the sun, fire, brāhmaṇas; cows and women having lactation, swiming
of oceans, advancement, getting out of difficulty, talk with pleased gods and
forefathers, seeing white clothes, clean tank, receiving meat, fish, poison, unclean
objects, umbrella and mirror, white flowers, journey on cart driven by horse and
bull, journey to the east and the north, weaping, rising after fall and subduing enemies.
[80-86]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on signs of recovery]

Presence of the symptoms of good psyche, devotion to physician and brāhmaṇas,
curability of the disease, absence of frustration–these are the signs of the recovery
from illness. When the patient is free from illness the man having auspicious signs,
attains strength, long life-span and great happiness and other desired objects. [87-88]

तत्र श्लोकौ–

[Devanagari unclear: summing verses]

Now the summing up verses–

In the chapter on cowdung-like powder the signs of death and recovery have
been described in respect of messengers, dreams, patient's conduct, protentous signs,
administration of drugs and success.

Thus this context has been explained properly which should be constantly exam-
ined by the physician. By this he attaint success, standing reputation and wealth be-
cause of his success in the profession. [89-90]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते इन्द्रियस्थाने गोमयचूर्णीयमिन्द्रियं
नाम द्वादशोऽध्यायः ॥१२॥

Thus ends the twelfth chapter on cowdung-like powder etc. in Indriyasthāna
in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka.

इन्द्रियस्थानं समूर्णम् ।

Here ends the section on the signs of life and death.

72 C.S. - I
