INTRODUCTION

1. THE SCHOOL OF ĀTREYA

Āyurveda (the science of life) is one of the branches of the Vedas. It is
regarded as upaveda of Ṛgveda or Atharva-veda but, really speaking, it is a
stream of the knowledge coming down from generation to generation since eternity
parallel to the vedic literature that is why its emergence has been said to be from
the Creator (Brahmā) Himself prior to the creation. It is taken as eternal because
nobody knows when it was not there. All this shows its long tradition and deep
attachment to the Indian culture.

As the knowledge advanced gradually, Āyurveda was divided into eight spe-
cialities–Kāyacikitsā (internal medicine), Śalya (surgery), Śālākya (pertaining to
diseases of supra-clavicular region), Kaumārabhṛtya (pediatrics including obstet-
rics and gynaecology), Agadatantra (toxicology), Bhūtavidyā (pertaining to micro-
organisms or spirits), Rasāyana (promotive therapy) and Vājīkaraṇa (pertaining to
aphrodisiacs). A number of treatises were composed on each branch making all of
them full-fledged specialities but at the same time keeping room for inter-discipli-
nary approach and coordination. Out of them, two specialities developed to greater
extent making two distinct schools–one the school of medicine and the other the
school of surgery. The former was known as Kāyacikitsā, Ātreya or Paunarvasa
sampradāya and the latter as Śalya or Dhānvantara sampradāya.

According to the narrative given in the Caraka Saṃhitā, the tradition of
Āyurveda started right from Brahmā and passed through Dakṣa Prajāpati and
Indra to Bharadwāja (C.Sū. 1. 4-27) or Arti (C.Ci. 1.4.3) who handed it down to
Ātreya. It shows that the tradition upto Indra was a divine one and it was
Bharadwāja or Arti who brought it to the terrestrial level. Ātreya discussed the
topics of medicine with the scholar-sages in different symposia organised in vari-
ous parts of the country and formulated the basic concepts accordingly. He had
six illustrious disciples–Agniveśa, Bhela, Jatūkarṇa, Parāśara, Hārīta and Kṣārapāṇi,
Of them Agniveśa was the most brilliant one who documented the precepts of his
teacher faithfully in his compendium known as Agniveśa-tantra (Agniveśa's
treatise). The other disciples followed him and composed their own compendia
but the Agniveśa-tantra was always the most popular text representing the School
of Ātreya (or medicine). Afterwards it was refined and enlarged by Caraka when
it began to be known as the Caraka Saṃhitā though the original treatise of Agniveśa
also continued to exist for a long period as seen by its quotations found in several
commentaries. The Caraka-saṃhitā was once again reduced by a Kashmirian
scholar, Dṛḍhabala. The present text of the Caraka-saṃhitā read all over the
world today is the Agniveśa-tantra as refined by Caraka and later redacted by Dṛḍhabala.
