vii

mentaries of Cakrapāṇi, Indu, Śrīkaṇṭhadatta and Śivadāsa Sen etc. as specialist
of Śālākya (Supra-clavicular diseases) is definitely a different person.

Bhikṣu Ātreya also seems to be different from Punarvasū Ātreya because in
one of the symposia (C.Sū. 25.24-25) Punarvasū Ātreya has contradicted his views.
He may be some person coming from the Ātreya clan but later on adopting non-
vedic (Buddhist) views.

There is mention of one Ātreya who was connected with the Takṣaśilā University
and was teacher of the illustrious surgeon Jīvaka. He also seems to be different person
expert in surgery whereas Punarvasū was an expert in medicine. There is no mention
at all of Takṣaśilā in the Caraka saṃhitā. Had Ātreya been connected with the same,
it would have been mentioned certainly in some place or the other.

Ātreya is referred to somewhere by epithets 'Cāndrabhāgī'¹ or 'Cāndrabhāga'²
which is interpreted either as the name of his mother (Cāndrabhāgā) or the place
covered by the river Cāndrabhāgā (modern Chamba in Himachal Pradesh).

1. Agniveśa was the foremost among the disciples of Ātreya and the author
of the Agniveśa-tantra. Agniveśa is mentioned in Śārṅgaravādi (4.1.71), Aśvādi
(4.1.70), Gargādi (4.1.105) and Tikakitāvādi (2.4.68) Gaṇas of Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī.
Goldstucker has fixed 7th cent B.C. as the date of Pāṇini. As Agniveśa is mentioned
in more than one gaṇas it is evident that he existed long back and became a
historical figure by the time of Pāṇini.

2. In the Caraka-saṃhitā, Āyurveda is said to be intimately connected with
Atharvaveda. It shows that the School of Ātreya was founded after the Atharvaveda
rationalising its tradition. The date of Atharvaveda is fixed as 1500 B.C. on the
basis of the reference of Parīkṣita in the Atharvaveda and interval of 1015 years³
or 1115 years⁴ between the time of Parīkṣita and Nanda, the emperor of Magadha.

On the basis of these points the date of Ātreya may be fixed before Pāṇini
(7th Cent. B.C.) and after the Atharvaveda (1500 B.C.) e.g. near-about 1000 B.C.

CARAKA

On the second stratum stands Caraka who was the first man to refine the treatise
of Agniveśa thoroughly and enlarge it with his interpretations and annotations. His
contributions in this respect were so spectacular that the original treatise in its new
form began to be known on the name of Caraka himself instead of the original author.
The original Agniveśa-tantra in brief (Sūtra) style was enlarged with his annotations
(Bhāṣya) by Caraka. Thus Caraka was the Bhāṣyakāra of Agniveśa's work as was
Patañjali for the Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini. That is why no wonder that Caraka has been
identified as Patañjali, the author of Yogasūtra and Mahābhāṣya.

1. C. Sū. 13.101.                    2. Bhela, P. 42.
3. Viṣṇu Purāṇa. 4.42.32.          4. Bhāgawata. 12.11.26.
