ix

not mentioned as author of the text though Agniveśa is there¹ and the followers
of Caraka instead of having been assimilated in the general mass of vaidyas formed
a separate group patronised by the Śaka kings². All these facts indicate that Caraka
was either himself a Śaka or very close to them so that he had to struggle hard
for putting his foot down. Perhaps during the same process, the work of Caraka
(the Caraka saṃhitā) was mutilated which was redacted and reconstructed by
Dṛḍhabala in part.

There are many popular verses which show the identity of Caraka and
Patañjali.³ Had this been the reality, there would not have been any difficulty in
fixing the date of Caraka because the date of Patañjali is decided unanimously
as middle of the 2nd Cent. B.C. on the basis of historical evidences. Though there
is a large number of similarities among the Caraka saṃhitā, Mahābhāṣya and
Yogasūtra, it can't be proved conclusively because of the heavier points against
it.⁴ Dṛḍhabala, Vāgbhaṭa and earlier commentators have also not made any
indication about it.

Regarding the date of Caraka the following evidences may be considered:–
External evidences:
1. Agniveśa is mentioned in several gaṇas of Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī but Caraka not
   even once. The word 'Caraka' used in one of the aphorisms⁵ denotes one of
   the traditions of black Yajurveda and not the author of an Āyurvedic
   compendium. The date of Pāṇini is 7th Cent. B.C. and as such Caraka comes
   after that.

2. Vāgbhaṭas in their works 'Aṣṭāṅgasaṃgraha' and 'Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya' (6th Cent.
   A.D.) have metioned Caraka explicitly which shows that by that time the
   Caraka saṃhitā attained its place as the representative work of the School of
   Medicine.

1. Nāvanītaka 1.8
2. Nāsika inscription No. 10.
   Also see Bṛhajjātaka 15.1. the word 'Caraka' here is interpreted by Rudra as चरका
   योगमार्गकुशला मुद्रादिभिर्विविक्ताङ्गा:। पाषण्डभेदाः। Lalitavistara (Ch. 1) also mentions the sect of
   Carakas along with Brāhmaṇas, Śramaṇas and Parivrājakas.
3. See Carakapañjikā (of Swāmikumāra), Cakrapāṇi's com. on the Caraka saṃhitā,
   Patañjalicaritam of Rāmabhadra Dīkṣita, Bhartṛhari's Vākyapadīya (Brahmakāṇḍa)
   Bhojavṛtti etc. Nāgeśa Bhaṭṭa, takes Patañjali as the author of the Caraka saṃhitā:–
   आदौ तन्त्रं चरकं स्मारयामि मध्यमं चरकस्य शेषं व्याकरणं प्रतिपादयामि। (Laghumañjūṣā,
   p.9, Chaukhambha, 1963, 2nd ed.)
4. See my Caraka-Cintana. (1970)p. 25-43.
5. कटचरकस्तलुक् । (4.3.107).

2 C.S.-I
