xii

chapters in each group. They are called as Catuṣkas (quadruplets) which deal with
drugs, health, precepts, preparations, diseases, planning and diet. The last two
chapters are known as Saṃgrahādhyāya (concluding chapters).

The subject matter dealt with in the above eight sections are fundamentals,
diagnosis, specific features, human body, fatal signs, treatment, pharmaceuticals
and successful management.

The existence of uttaratantra in the Caraka-saṃhitā is a matter of controversy.
There is a verse which indicates the existence of uttaratantra¹. Cakrapāṇi says that
this verse itself is unauthoritative and is not read by the elders because the
uttaratantra in the Agniveśa-tantra is unauthoritative. This statement is important
in the sense that it confirms that the questioned verse was existent at the time of
Cakrapāṇi and that the Agniveśa-tantra also had uttaratantra. It is again confirmed
by his another statement². Thus it is not improbable that the Agniveśatantra or at
least the Caraka-saṃhitā had the uttaratantra (or sthāna). This is supported by the
fact that the vedic tradition envisages appending the Khila (or uttara) sthāna in the
end of the Saṃhitā. The Kāśyapa-saṃhitā has also the Khila-sthāna.

4. TEXTUAL VARIATIONS AND THE PRESENT TEXT OF THE CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ

The Caraka-saṃhitā is the most popular text of Āyurveda and is one of the
few texts of the ancient Āyurvedic compendiums which is available in complete
form. Its value also lies in the fact that it is a traditional continuation of the tantra
(treatise) composed by Agniveśa, the foremost among the six disciples of Ātreya,
the great teacher and the founder of the School of Medicine. Thus now it is the
only representative work of that school and as such it is natural that all Āyurvedic
physicians and students turn to this compendium for rational guidance and support.
Hence it is also quoted often as authority in support of their statements by scholars
and writers. So a study of the text of this valuable basic source-material is necessary.

Because of its indispensable nature as an authoritative source-material it is
read and consulted all over the country in its original form and abroad in translation
in different languages. This has led to various recensions and variations of the text
adopted by the respective traditions. These recensions were based on geographical
factors, medical schools as well as traditions. For instance, (a) there was a different
recension of the text prevalent in Kashmir about which definite informations are

___________
१. प्रमदेताः प्रथयन्ते विस्तरेणोद्दे पुनः । तत्स्वतन्त्रपरमर्शेषु तत्परः गुणदोषाः ॥  (C.Si.12.50)
२. तदुत्तरान्ते प्रतिपादित्वाहेतो विविधिता आयतनेष । (C.Si.12.41-44)
