xiii

found in commentaries¹. Saindhavas also had their own recension which is referred
to in the commentary of Jejjaṭa². Perhaps there were also other recensions in
different regions of the country.

(b) Different schools of the medicine had their own textual version as suited to them.³

(c) Different monasteries and teachers had their own recensions of the text
which were followed by their disciples. That is why we find variations in the text
followed by different commentators for the purpose of their commentaries. As this
entails an exhaustive survey and would be a separate work, I would present here
only one instance where the famous commentators Jejjaṭa and Cakrapāṇidatta
differ widely. In the context of vaginal disorders, there is a decoction of certain
drugs to check the excessive discharge⁴. (C.Ci. 30.82). Here the version adopted
by Jejjaṭa is quite different from that of Cakrapāṇi and is important in the sense
that it introduces two altogether new drugs-būka and pullāsa particularly the latter
one because this is the only reference of this drug in Caraka saṃhitā. The scholars
who consulted only the Cakrapāṇidatta's version, have missed this item.

Variations in textual versions are found even in the recent editions such as by
Kavirāj Gaṅgādhara Roy and Yogindranāth Sen.

The most popular version of the text is that edited by Acharya Yadavji Trikamji and
published by the Nirnaya Sagar Press Bombay with Cakrapāṇidatta's commentary. Yadavji
has taken great pains to consult a number of manuscripts and present before the Ayurvedic
world a systematically edited version of the Caraka-saṃhitā. It gained ground immediately
after publication and scholars accepted this text warmly. Gradually it attained an authoritative
status and the version given in this edition began to be quoted as authority. The faith
became so blinding that nobody could dare to make a critical study of the text so far. All
later editions from other publishers virtually followed the same text. Looking to its so much
importance and influence, it was necessary to have glimpse of the text with unbiased attitude.

While going through the present text of the Caraka-saṃhitā (Nirnaya Sagar,
Third edition, 1941) one is surprised to find so many errors and anomalies which

१. अत्र कारणीया: "सिन्धुशालिनिरम्लगुडैः" इत्याद्यैवम् विसिन्धुशालिग्लावपक्षे पठति । "सालिसाल्वलोधेन" इत्याद्यैवम्वरे
   काराणीये पठति, स च नागिम्कैः। (C.Ci. 3. 114-127)
   काशर्पकेः च "शीतिलैः सिन्धुशालाद्यैश्चापि" इति पठति विकल्पश्चात्र पश्यते । (C.Ci. 113. 113)
   "काशर्पणाया" "ई स्नेहे स्तुपानी" इति पठति । (C.Ci. 25. 39-43)
   तथा च काशर्पयाटे पठति : (Madhukosa, 2. 18-19)
   कारणीमत्तुः यतः : (Ibid. 5. 24-27)
   "निक्षकासोनम्मुद्रैः" इति काशर्पिका: (Ibid. 14.2)

२. काशर्पकेन्द्रभिः शकटालिनुभूपर्यापितम् पठन्त्येनम्, प्रदेश तो बानाभी। (C.Ci. 3. 210-214)
   Also see (C. Ci. 30. 127-132)

३. तथा च सूत्रैः पठति : (Jejjaṭa's com. C.Ci. 23. 250-253)

४. करवीचायनम्वानुकुण्डुलानाम्बाः : (Jejjaṭa, C. Ci. 30.82)
   करवीचायनम्वानुकुण्डुलासिनाम्बाः : (Cakrapāṇi, C. Ci. 30.82)
