xix

Vāgbhaṭa's Aṣṭāṅgasaṃgraha and Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya are based mainly on these two
texts.

The popularity of the Caraka-saṃhitā continued to increase and it attracted
many top-ranking scholars to involve themselves as commentators. Bhaṭṭāra
Hariścandra, Jejjaṭa, Sudhīra, Naradatta, Īśvarasena, Cakrapāṇi, Gaḍādhara,
Vāpyācandra, Śivadāsa Sen, Gaṅgādhara Roy, Yogindranāth sen etc. wrote
commentary on it. Every top-ranking scholar did not satisfy until he commented
upon the Caraka-saṃhitā and thus exhibited his understanding of the text and
scholarly way of interpreting the same.

This Saṃhitā was popular not only in medical but also in non-medical circle.
The non-medical works like Naiṣadhīya-caritam (4.116), Laghumañjūṣā etc. refer
the work with reverence. Even in modern times it attracted notice of western
scholars. A club (Caraka club) was established in New York in 1898 to perpetuate
the memory of the author of the oldeset extant work in Indian medicine.

The work became so popular and its demand was so extensive that it was
translated in various languages from time to time. The Caraka-saṃhitā was translated
into Persian and Arabic in 10th Cent. A.D. English translation also came out in
19th Cent. Later on it was translated in Hindi and various regional languages. The
Jamnagar edition (1949) contains translation of the text in Hindi, Gujarātī and
English.

6. COMMENTATORS ON THE CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ

From early times to the present age the Caraka-saṃhitā has been commented
upon by various scholars. Notable among them are as follows:

1. Bhaṭṭāra Hariścandra–He wrote the Caraka-nyāsa commentary on the Caraka-
saṃhitā. Now it is available in Mss. form¹ only upto the third chapter of the
Sūtrasthāna which was once published by Pt. Masta Ram Shastri of Lahore.
Māheśvara, the author of Viśvaprakāśā (Kosa) informs in the introductory
verses that Bhaṭṭāra was the physician to the king Sāhasāṅka and that he was
one of his forefathers. Bhaṭṭāra Hariścandra was a contemporary or predecessor
of Vāgbhaṭa (6th Cent A.D.). He is quoted by Jejjaṭa, Cakrapāṇi, Vijayarakṣita
etc. with respect. He is said to have redacted the Kharaṇādakasaṃhitā² and
perhaps also composed his own Saṃhitā (Bhaṭṭāra-Saṃhitā). Candraṭa praises
him as the foremost commentator on the Caraka-saṃhitā.³

1. Govt. Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras.
2. Indu : Com. on Aṣṭāṅgasaṃgraha, Kalpa.
3. व्याप्तारी हरिचंद्रं कौजेऽस्त्याति सती सुधीर व | अन्नमायुर्वेद व्याख्या भासार्थं समाप्तोति ।। (Com. Cikitsākalikā)
