xxii

7. CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ

Caraka revised the Agniveśa-Tantra wholly and expanded it with his own
annotations. The present shape of the Saṃhitā which differentiates it from the
other compemporary Saṃhitās owes mostly to Caraka that is why Agniveśa was
replaced by Caraka as author of the text. The main contributions of the Caraka-
saṃhitā may be enumerated as follows :–

1. Advancement of basic concepts :

The basic concepts of Āyurveda evolved during the Vedic period were
crystallized refined and advanced further in the Caraka-saṃhitā. They were also
placed on a sound scientific footing so that all physiological and pathological
phenomena were interpreted logically. The philosophical concept of
pañcamahābhūta was studied in application to the human body. The theory of
tridoṣa was also studied in details in application to the properties, physiological
functions, pathological manifestations and therapeutic management of vāta, pitta
and kapha. The law of uniformity of nature¹ was established which helped in
applying the physical laws to the biological field. It remains a mystery for all in
what type of laboratories and with what equipments they were able to arrive at
these scientific truths. Perhaps the entire nature was their laboratory and their own
keen observation and divine vision worked as their instruments.

2. Rational attitude :

It is the Caraka-saṃhitā which got rid of the blind beliefs and superstitions
of olden days in respect of causation and cure of disorders and developed a
rational attitude towards these problems. In early phase, perhaps the 'Daiva-
vyapāśraya' (Supernatural) therapy was the mostly relied upon but Caraka added
'Yukti-vyapāśraya' (rational)² to make it logical and scentific. In order to stablise
the idea, 'Yukti' was added as one of the Pramāṇas (means of valid knowledge)³.
Caraka has emphasised althrough to work according to Yukti (rationale). He has
advised to move always with knowledge⁴. There should be proper correlation of
theoretical knowledge (jñāna) and practical skill (karma). Caraka has emphasised
on the process of investigation which is essential for arriving at scientific truths⁵
that is why he has used more than once the word 'Parīkṣā'⁶ instead of 'Pramāṇa'.

1. पुरुषोऽयं लोकसंमित:। (C.Śā. 5.3)
2. C.Sū. 11. 52.
3. C.Sū. 11. 17.
4. ज्ञानपूर्वक कर्मना सदायस्मि प्रशंसनि कुशला:। । (C. vi. 8. 69.)
5. प्रजेष्यावौद्धि हि कुशला:। (C.Sū. 10. 5.)
6. द्विविधा परीक्षा ज्ञानवतम्। (C. vi. 4. 8.)
   तस्य चतुर्विधा परीक्षा, आप्तोपदेश:, प्रत्यक्षम्, अनुमानं, युक्तिश्चेति। (C.Sū.11.17)
