xxiv

6. Expansion of the discipline :

Āyurveda is divided into eight well demarcated specialities which are mentioned in the Caraka-saṃhitā. Apart from this the discipline of medicine expanded further in the light of knowledge gained in course of time. Initially Āyurveda was 'Triṣkandha' (three-pillared) or 'Triṣūtra' (three-threaded) having Hetu (etiology), Liṅga (signs and symptoms) and Auṣadha (therapeutics) as constituents but later on Hetu and Liṅga were further analysed and developed to Pañca-nidāna : Nidāna (etiology), Pūrvarūpa (prodroma), Rūpa (signs and symptoms), Upāśaya (therapeutic suitability) and Saṃprāpti (pathogenesis) which became as five means of examination of disease.

7. Scientific method of diagnosis :

The Caraka-saṃhitā gives a scientific method of the diagnosis of diseases. First of all, the facts about the patient should be gathered by means of authoritative scriptures, perception and inference¹. The patient should also be examined in respect of doṣa, dūṣya, agni, sattva, sātmya, prakṛti, bala, vayas etc. Caraka has described the tenfold entities to be examined which contains all relevant facts². The disease has to be examined in respect of etiology, prodromal symptoms, suitability and pathogenesis³. Caraka says that first of all one should examine the patient, then the drug and thereafter he should proceed for action.⁴

8. Importance of Nature :

Āyurveda relies completely on nature and it is only to provide assistance to nature that drug or other therapeutic measure is applied⁵. The Caraka-saṃhitā lays emphasis on svabhāvoparama⁶ (recession by nature) and all drugs and dietitic regimens are based on this principle. For the same reason, proper emphasis is given on saṃśodhana (evacuative) therapy⁷ and natural resistance of the patient⁸. The Caraka-saṃhitā, from beginning to end, has emphasised on these aspects which form the main basis of the Āyurvedic treatment.

9. Emphasis on promotion and prevention :

Caraka-saṃhitā starts with the chapter dealing with the promotion of life. For this there is special branch, Rasāyana, which has been dealt with in detail in the first chapter of the section on therapeutics. In the second chapter there is description of the formulations useful for promotion of fertility and progeny. Dealing with the promotive measures at the very start of the section shows greater emphasis on the same. Caraka has also laid down the code of good conduct by which one can remain healthy and long-lived. He has also emphasised on prevention of diseases⁹

1. C. Vi. 4.        2. C. Vi. 8. 70-80.     3. C. Ni. 1. 5.      4. C. Sū. 20. 20.
5. C. Sū. 10.5.    6. C. Sū. 16.27.        7. C. Sū. 16. 16-20  8. C. Sū. 28. 6.
9. C. Sū. 5. 13.
