xxv

for which he has devoted a number of chapters dealing with daily routine, seasonal
living etc. in the first section of the Saṃhitā. The Caraka-saṃhitā shows the path
by which a man, devoid of any ailment, can live happily and enjoy the normal
life-span (100 years).

10. Scientific study of drugs :

Plants were studied analytically during the Vedic period as evident from the
'oṣadhi-sūkta' of Ṛgveda (10.97. 1-23) and relevant portions of Atharvaveda (8.7.1-
8, 11.6. 16-17) etc. The scientific study of morphology and pharmacological activity
of the medicinal plants and other drugs was started during the post-Vedic period
the document of which is found in the Caraka-saṃhitā. Mostly the plants were
used as drugs and as such the knowledge of plants in respect of name, form,
properties, actions and therapeutic uses¹ was essential for a physician. The Caraka-
saṃhitā starts with the quadruplet of drugs (Bheṣaja-catuṣka) which itself speaks
for the importance given to the study of drugs in the Saṃhitā. The classification
of drugs is given from various angles². Division of drugs into fifty groups according
to pharmacological action³ is the first attempt in this direction and as such is the
most valuable contribution of the Caraka-saṃhitā. The basic concepts of the
pharmacology such as rasa, guṇa, vīrya, vipāka and prabhāva were studied
rationally for intrepreting the drug action and are described systematically in the
text.⁴

It is difficult to enumerate the contributions of the Caraka-saṃhitā in toto,
only the very important ones have been mentioned here.

8. EARLIER ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

Among the English translations of the Caraka-saṃhitā, the notable one was
by Avināśa Chandra Kaviratna published incomplete from Calcutta (1891-1899).
Mahendra Lal Sarkar translated only two chapters which were published in the
Calcutta Journal of Medicine (1870). Roth also got some portion published. All
these editions now are practically obsolete and have become a matter of historical
interest.

At the fag end of the first half of the present century (in 1949), a voluminous
edition was published from Shree Gulabkumar bā Ayurvedic Society, Jamnagar
under the guidance of Dr. P.M. Mehta who later became the first Director of the
Central Institute of Research in Indigenous Systems of Medicine established at
Jamnagar. For decades it was the only edition available for the English-knowing

1. C. Sū. 1. 123-126
2. C. Sū. 1, 4.
3. C. Sū. 4.
4. C. Sū. 26.

4 C.S.-I
