4                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH.

thya, Cyavana, The Bhārgava (of Bhrgu's Clan), Abhijit, Gārgya, Śāṇḍilya, Kauṇḍilya
(nya), Vārkṣi, Devala, Gālava, Śānkrtya, Baijavāpi, Kuśika, Bādarāyaṇa, Badiśa,
Śaraloma, Kāpya, Kātyāyana, Kāṅkāyana, Kaikāśeya, Dhaumya, Mārica, Kāśyapa,
Śarkarākṣa, Hiraṇyākṣa, Lokākṣa, Paingi, Śaunaka, Śākuneya, Maitreya, Maimatāyani
along with the sages of the Vaikhānasas and Vālakhilya orders and other great sages.
They all, sources of spiritual knowledge, selfcontrol and restraint of mind, illumined
with brilliance of penance like fire having oblations, took their seats comfortably
and held auspicious deliberations. [8-14]

धर्मार्थकामामोक्षाणामारोग्यं मूलमुत्तमम् ॥१४॥
रोगास्तस्यापहर्तारः: श्रेयसो जीवितस्य च । प्राद्भूतिं मध्यमानन्तरस्यो महान्वयम् ॥१५॥
अः स्यातीत्ये शमोपाय इच्छुका व्यापारमित्रिहः: । अथ ते शरणं प्रार्थं देवशुश्रीचयकृपां ॥१७॥
स बद्धाति शमोपायं यथावदनुदारशुः ।

Disease-free condition is the best source of virtue, wealth, gratification and eman-
cipation while diseases are destroyers of this (source), welfare and life itself. Now
this has appeared as a great obstacle for human beings and what could be the
means for their amelioration. Saying this they meditated on this. Then with their meditative
vision they saw Indra as saviour. That god of gods is only able to tell the correct
means of amelioration (of diseases). [15-17]

कः: सङ्कटाञ्चमनं गाछेपु इचे प्रतिवेपितिः ॥१८॥
अहमग्ने नियुज्यस्येभावो प्राथम् यत्र: । भरद्वाजोऽभ्यगादीन्द्रामुचिह्नः: स निवेशितिः: ॥१९॥
स शक्राभवनं गत्वा सुरीस्वामिभ्यामागतुम् । दर्शनं बलनातनातं दीपयानसनक्षमम् ॥२०॥
सोऽभिगम्य यथाग्नीषिरिचिस्त्वनः: सूरिवेशः: । प्रोवाच विनयाणीमण्डूषीणां शाक्षमणुत्तम् ॥२१॥
व्याधयो हि मनुष्याणां: सर्वाभिप्रायसाध्यम्: । तद्बुद्धि मे प्रापयोत्सव विनयाभनसाङ्केतम् ॥२२॥
धर्मे प्रोवाच भगवानयुर्वेदं शतक्रतुः: । प्रदेरस्योभिते मुदृश्य विपुलं परमर्षयः: ॥२३॥

Who should go to the abode of Indra to inquire about this? On this, first spoke
Bharadvāja 'I may be deputed for this work' and so he was deputed by the sages.
Having gone to Indra's abode, he was the killer of Bala sitting in the midst of the
groups of godly sages and glittering like fire. He approached him with felicitating
words of praises and blessings and the intelligent one submitted to him the message of the
sages humbly and in the best possible way—"Diseases causing fear in all living beings
have appeared, so, O Lord of gods, tell me the proper measures for (their) ameliora-
tion'. Then Lord Indra, having observed the wide intelligence of the great sage, deliv-
ered to him Āyurveda in a few words. [18-23]

हेतुलिङ्गौषधज्ञानं स्वस्थातुरपरायणम् । त्रिसूत्रं शाश्वतं पुण्यं बुबुधे यं पितामहः: ॥२४॥

Āyurveda providing knowledge of aetiology, symptomology and therapeutics,
best way for both the healthy and the sick, tri-aphorismic, continuing for the time
immemorial and virtuous which was known by Brahmā (creator) first. [24]
