6                             CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

were properly composed. All praised them, the benefactors of all creatures, alongwith
the loud applause for the compassion on creatures. These (loud) virtuous words of
the great sages were heard by the godly sages and gods living in heaven and they
were extremely delighted. The deep and affectionate sound of 'well done' expressed
by the creatures with happiness in the sky resounded the three worlds. The pleasant
wind began to blow, all corners blossomed with lustre and there were divine showers
of flowers and water. Then the goddesses of knowledge Buddhi (intelligence), Siddhi
(success), Smṛti (memory), Medhā (intellect), Dhṛti (restraint), Kīrti (fame), Kṣamā
(forbearance) and Dayā (kindness) entered into Agniveśa etc. Thus their compendi-
ums approved by the great sages were established on (strong) footing for the welfare
of the creatures. [32-40]

हितािहते सुखं दुःखमायुस्तस्य हितािहतम् । मानं च तथा यत्तोक्तमायुर्वेदः स उच्यते ॥४१॥

Āyurveda is that which deals with good, bad, happy and unhappy life, its pro-
moters and non-promoters, measure and nature. [41]

शरीरेन्द्रियसत्त्वात्मसंयोगो धारि जीवितम् । नित्यगश्चानुबन्धश्च पर्यायैरायुरुच्यते ॥४२॥

'Āyus' means the conjunction of body, sense organs, mind and self and is known
by the synonyms dhāri, jīvita, nityaga and anubandha. [42]

तस्यायुषः पुण्यतमो वेदो वेदविदां मतः । वक्ष्यते यन्मनुष्याणां लोकयोरुभयोर्हितम् ॥४३॥

The scholars of Vedas regard the Veda of that Āyus as the most virtuous one
which is said as good for both the worlds for the human beings. [43]

सर्वदा सर्वभावानां सामान्यं वृद्धिकारणम् । ह्रासहेतुर्विशेषश्च प्रवृत्तिरुभयस्य तु ॥४४॥

Similarity of all substances is always the cause of increase and dissimilarity the
cause of decrease. Both effect by their application. [44]

सामान्यमेकत्वकरं, विशेषस्तु पृथक्त्वकृत् । तुल्यार्थता हि सामान्यं, विशेषस्तु विपर्ययः ॥४५॥

Similarity brings unity while dissimilarity causes diversity. Again, similarity
carries the sense of 'equal' while dissimilarity is opposite. [45]

सत्त्वमात्मा शरीरं च त्रयमेतत्त्रिदण्डवत् । लोकस्तिष्ठति संयोगात्तत्र सर्वं प्रतिष्ठितम् ॥४६॥
स पुमांश्चेतनं तच्च तच्चाधिकरणं स्मृतम् । वेदस्यास्य, तदर्थं हि वेदोऽयं संप्रकाशितः ॥४७॥

Mind, self and body–these three make a tripod on which the living world stands.
All depend on this (living world). That (living body) is Puruṣa (person), sentient and
location of this Veda (Āyurveda). For him alone, this Veda is brought to light. [46-47]

खादीन्यात्मा मनः कालो दिशश्च द्रव्यसंग्रहः । सेन्द्रियं चेतनं द्रव्यं, निरिन्द्रियमचेतनम् ॥४८॥

In short, ākāśa etc. (ākāśa, vāyu, tejas, ap and pṛthivī), self, mind, time and
space are dravyas (substances). Dravya having sense organ is sentient while that
without it is insentient. [48]

सार्था गुणास्तद्वद् बुद्धिः प्रयत्नान्ताः पराद्याः । गुणाः प्रोक्ताः प्रयत्नादि कर्म चेष्टितमुच्यते ॥४९॥
