I]                            SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    7

Sense objects (śabda, sparśa, rūpa, rasa, gandha), properties beginning with
guru¹, knowledge, qualities ending with prayatna² and beginning with para³ are called
guṇas. The movement iniated by effort is called karma (action). [49]

समवायोऽपृथग्भावो भूम्यादीनां गुणैर्मतः । स नित्यो यत्र हि द्रव्यं न तद्भ्रंशो न नित्यतः ॥५०॥

Samavāya (inherence) is the inseparableness of pṛthivī etc. (dravya) with
their guṇas (properties). This is eternal because no dravya (substance) is devoid of
property. [50]

यत्राश्रिताः कर्मगुणाः कारणं समवायि च । तद् द्रव्यं समवायी तु निश्चेष्टः कारणं गुणः ॥५१॥

Dravya (substance including drugs) is that where actions and properties are lo-
cated and which is the material cause (of its effect). Guṇa (property) is related with
inherence (to dravya), is devoid of action and is (asamavāyi non-inherent) cause of
its effect). [51]

संयोगे च विभागे च कारणं द्रव्यमाश्रितम् । कर्तव्यस्य क्रिया कर्म कर्म नान्यदपेक्षते ॥५२॥

The causative factor in conjunction and disjunction, located in dravya and
performance of that to be done is karma (action). Karma does not require another
factor. [52]

इत्युक्तं कारणं कार्यं धातुसाम्यमिहोच्यते । धातुसाम्यक्रिया चोक्ता तन्त्रस्यास्य प्रयोजनम् ॥५३॥

Thus described the cause. Now the effect, dhātusāmya, is discussed here. Now
the object of this compendium is achievement of dhātusāmya (equilibrium of sustain-
ing and nourishing factors. [53]

कालबुद्धीन्द्रियार्थानां योगो मिथ्या न चाति च । द्वयाश्रयाणां व्याधीनां त्रिविधो हेतुसंग्रहः ॥५४॥

Perverted, negative and excessive use of time, intellect and sense objects is the
threefold cause of both psychic and somatic disorders. [54]

शरीरं सत्त्वसंज्ञं च व्याधीनामाश्रयो मतः । तथा सुखानां, योगस्तु सुखानां कारणं समः ॥५५॥

Both body and mind are the locations of disorders as well as pleasures. The bal-
anced use is the cause of pleasures. [55]

निर्विकारः परस्त्वात्मा सत्त्वभूतगुणेन्द्रियैः । चैतन्ये कारणं नित्यो द्रष्टा पश्यति हि क्रियाः ॥५६॥

The supreme self is Changeless, is the cause of consciousness with the
conjunction of mind, properties of bhūtas⁴ and sense organs, is eternal and seer who
sees all the actions. [56]

1. Guru-laghu, śīta-uṣṇa, snigdha-rūkṣa, manda-tīkṣṇa, ślakṣṇa-khara, sāndra-drava,
   mṛdukaṭhina, sthira-sara, sūkṣma-sthūla, viṣada-picchila (20).
2. icchā, dveṣa, sukha, duḥkha, prayatna (5).
3. Para-apara, yukti; Sāṅkhya, Saṃyoga, Vibhāga, Pṛthaktva, Parimāṇa, saṃskāra, abhyāsa (10).
4. Bhūtas are five–pṛthvī, ap, tejas, vāyu and ākāśa. Their properties respectively are gandha,
   rasa, rūpa, sparśa and śabda.
