8                                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                                    [CH.

वायुः पित्तं कफश्चोक्षः शारीरो दोषसंग्रहः । मानसः पुनरिष्टो रजश्च तम एव च ।।५७।।

Vāyu, pitta and kapha are, in short, somatic doṣas¹ and rajas and tamas are the psychic ones. [57]

प्रशमाभ्युपायैः पूर्वे दैवयुक्तिव्यपाश्रयैः । मानसो ज्ञानविज्ञानधैर्यस्मृतिसमाधिभिः ।।५८।।

The former ones are pacified by the remedial measures of divine and rational nature while the latter ones are treated with knowledge, specific knowledge, restraint, memory and meditation. [58]

रूक्षः शीतो लघुः सूक्ष्मश्चलो विशदः खरः । विपरीतगुणैर्द्रव्यैः संग्रहणमिति ।।५९।।
मंदतीक्ष्णोष्णलघुस्नेहद्रवसर एव च । विपरीतगुणैर्द्रव्यैः सद्यः शाम्यति दुर्बलम् ।।६०।।
मृदुस्निग्धद्रवस्निग्धगुरुमंदस्थिरपिच्छिलाः । श्लेष्मणः प्रशमं यान्ति विपरीतगुणैर्गुणाः ।।६१।।

Vāyu is non-unctuous, cold, light, subtle, mobile, rough and non-slippery in properties and is pacified by substances having opposite properties. Pitta is slightly unctuous, hot, sharp, liquid, sour, mobile and pungent and is pacified immediately by substances having opposite properties. The properties of kapha (are)-heaviness, coldness, softness, unctuousness, sweetness, immobility and sliminess, (which are) subsided by (substances having) opposite properties. [59-61]

विपरीतगुणैर्द्रव्यमात्राकालोपयोगिताः । योगेनापि विनिश्चित्य साध्याः साध्यसमाः क्रियाः ।।६२।।
सामान्यं च लक्षणानां व्यापाद्यानुपदिश्यते ।

Curable disorders recede by drugs having opposite properties and administered with due consideration of place, dose and time. Treatment of incurable diseases is not advised. [62]

भूयश्चातो द्रव्याणां गुणकर्माणि वक्ष्यते ।।६३।।

Now the properties and actions accordingly to drugs will be described in details. [63]

रसानां रसतस्य व्याप्तः जिह्विका । तिसृषु च विशेषे च प्रयोगः खाद्यवायुः ।।६४।।

Rasa is the object of rasanā (gustatory sense organ). Its material substances are ap and pṛthivī. In manifestation and differentiation of rasa, the other three ākāśa etc. (ākāśa, vāyu and tejas) are causative factors. [64]

स्वादुरम्लोऽथ लवणः तिक्तः कटुकस्तथैव च । षट्कोऽयं रसनाशस्त्र षट्कोऽयं रससंग्रहः ।।६५।।

Sweet, sour, saline, pungent, bitter and astringent-this is the group of six rasas (tastes). [65]

स्वाद्वम्ललवणा वातं जयन्ति तिक्तः कषायतिक्तकः ।।६६।।
कटुतिक्तकषायाश्च पित्तं । कटुतिक्तकषायाश्च कफोपशमनाः ।।१।।

(Among these taste) sweet, sour and saline overcome vāyu; astringent, sweet and bitter subdue pitta and astringent, pungent and bitter win over kapha. [66]

pungent-sour saline, sweet-sour-saline and pungent-bitter-astringent rasas aggravate pitta, kapha and vāta respectively. [1]

1. Factors responsible for physiological functions but capable of causing disorders are know as doṣas.
