12                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

urine is slightly alkaline, laxative and alleviates piles, śopha and udara. Elephant
urine is salty, beneficial for patients of kṛmi and kuṣṭha and commended for retention
of urine and faeces, poisons, disorders of kapha and piles. Camel urine is slightly
bitter, destroyer of dyspnoea, cough and piles. Horse urine is bitter-pungent and
destroyer of kuṣṭha, wounds and poisons. Ass urine is destroyer of epilepsy, insanity
and grahas (seizures). Thus urines are described here according to potency and
application. [92-104]

अतः क्षीराणि वक्ष्यन्ते कर्म चैषां गुणाश्च ते ॥१०५॥
अविक्षीरमजाक्षीरं गोक्षीरं माहिषं च धत् । उष्ट्रीणामथ नागीनां वडवायाः स्त्रियास्तथा ॥१०६॥
प्रायशो मधुरं स्निग्धं शीतं स्तन्यं यथे सरम् । प्रीणनं बृंहणं वृष्यं मेध्यं बल्यं मनस्करम् ॥१०७॥
जीवनीयं श्रमहरं श्वासकासनिबर्हणम् । हन्ति शोफातिसारं च सन्ध्यानं विड्ग्रहस्य च ॥१०८॥
सर्वप्राणभृतां सात्म्यं संशमनं शोधनं तथा । तर्पणायै हितं बाल्ये क्षीणे दीप्ताग्निसेवितम् ॥१०९॥
पानाद्यविविधव्याधिषु प्रयोगे गुल्मे तत्रोदरे । अशोसैरा अरेष्ठवि आदि हधक्यैराददेय विद्दिस्यात् ॥११०॥
योनिशुक्रप्रदोषेषु भुग्नेष्ववश्यगेषु च । पुरीषे यथिते यत्र्यं वात्तपित्तेशिबाभिन्ति ॥१११॥
नस्यालेपावगाहेषु वमनाव्यापनेषु च । विरेचने स्नेहने च यथा: सर्वत्र युज्यते ॥११२॥
यथाक्रमं हरीरेहस्ररनिवसतप्रायशः । अयकपेमुक्तरेिसं विकारा णुर्वेवक्मम् ॥११३॥

Now milks will be described and also their properties and actions. The milks are
of sheep, she-goat, cow, she-buffalo, she-camel, she-elephant, mare and women, In
general, milk is sweet, unctuous, cold, galactogogue, refreshing, promotes body
weight, semen, intellects strength and mental ability, is vitaliser, fatigue-alleviating,
destroyer of dyspnoea, cough and innate haemorrhage, union-promoting in injuries,
whole-some for all living beings, pacifier (of doṣas), eliminator (of malas), destroyer
of thirst and appetiser. This is the most useful in kṣīṇa (wasting), kṣata (injuries),
anaemia, acid gastritis, Consumption, gaseous tumor, abdominal enlargement,
diarrhoea, fever, burning sensation, oedema, specifically in dis- orders of female
genital tract and semen, deficiency of urine, hardened stool and disorders of vāta
and pitta. Milk is everywhere used in snuffing, pasting, bathing, emesis, non-unctuous
enema, purgation and unction. (I) will describe again the properties of individual
milks separately in order in the chapter of food and drinks fully. [105-113]

अथातः श्रयो वृक्षाः पूवर्यो फलमूलिभिः : । स्नुह्याश्मन्तकालोचमिदं कर्म पृथक्-पृथक् ॥११४॥
बमनेऽश्मन्तकं विद्यात् स्नुहीक्षीरं विरेचने । क्षीरनिर्यासमवीणा विद्येयैः समर्नेरेचने ॥११५॥

Now there are other three trees–snuhī, arka and aśmantaka which are different
from the plants of phalinī and mūlinī groups. Aśmantaka is known for emesis, latex
of snuhī for purgation and that of arka for both emesis and purgation. [114-115]

इमांस्तीपरायुः सुखानासुशेयो हिताद्शगतः । पूतीकः कृष्णागन्धा च तिलस्तदद्य तथा तकः ॥११६॥
विरेचनै प्रयोक्तव्याः पूतीकर्सलभ्वकत्ता । कृष्णागन्धा परीस्पं शोधेयोनिर्यो चोच्यते ॥११७॥
