1]                                SŪTRASTHĀNA                                13

दहुलिदधिगण्डेषु कुष्ठेष्वपचलमिंषु च । मदूकाआक्षोधसानेतानपि विद्याद्विरेचनम् ।।११८८।।
इत्युक्ताः फलमूलिन्यः-लेखाङ्क लघयन्ति च । मुषं ईरिणि शुक्लाश तथ वे विसर्पवर्त्सकः ।।११९।।

(They) also mentioned three other trees–pūtika, kṛṣṇagandha and tilwaka tree
the barks of which are beneficial. pūtika and tilwaka are used for purgation,
kṛṣṇagandha for parisarpa (erysipelas), oedema, piles, ringworm, abscess, glands, skin
diseases and alaji. Scholar should also know about these evacuating six trees.

Thus are described the fruity and rooty drugs, fats, salts, urines, milks, and six
trees the latex and bark of which are indicated. [116-119]

औषधीनांस्वरूपभ्यं जानते क्षत्र वने । अविज्ञायैव गोपाङ्ग ये चान्ये वनचारिणः ।।११२०।।
न नामज्ञानमात्रेण कृत्वान्यं वा पुनः । तेषां प्रापि कृतिर्विद्वान्नहि ।।११२१।।
योगविज्ञानकुशलस्तास्त तत्तविचक्षणः । किं पुनस्त विज्ञानावोधेयः सर्वैष विभाक्षः ।।११२।।
योगभाषां मु यो विद्याद्देशकालवपुर्विभिः । पुरुषं पुरुषं वीक्ष्य स विद्येनो भिषगुत्तमः ।।११३।।

Goat-herds shepherds, cowherds and other forest-dwellers know the plants by
name and form. Nobody can comprehend fully about the plants only by knowing
(their) names or forms. He is the real knower of them who, after knowing the
name and form, has got knowledge of their administration, let alone the one who
knows plants in all aspects. He is the best physician who knows administration of
these (plants) according to place and time and also keeping in view the individual
constitution. [120-123]

यथा विषं यथा शस्त्रं यथाऽउरिर्वज्रमेव वा । तथौषधमविज्ञातं विज्ञातममृतमुपमा ।।११२४।।
औषधं ह्यनभिज्ञातस्य भेषज महोदयः । भेषजं चापि दुर्विक्रान्तभयंजनपार्थिव ।।११२५।।

A drug, if unknown, is (fatal) like poison, weapon, fire and thunderbolt while if
known, is (vitaliser) like nectar. A drug unknown by these–name, form and properties
(including actions)–and badly administered even if known are responsible for
complications. [124-125]

योगाद्धि विषं तीक्ष्णतमं भेषजं भवेत् । भेषजं चापि दुर्दृष्टं तीक्ष्णतां संपद्यते विषम् ।।११२९।।
तस्माज्ञ विषं भुवि भुक्तिकामाय भेषजम् । योगात्किञ्चिद्विधेयतां यादीनां प्रयोजकः ।।११२।।
कुचेष्टितेति मुनिगणे सहायास्वारया रोगिणो । यो भेषजानिव महाभुनि प्रयच्छति ।।११२।।
दुःखिताय सहायाध्या ब्रह्मणाय रोगिणो । यो भेषजं विना सद्धर्मं स्थानापत्ति प्रयच्छति ।।११२।।
त्वक्सर्वस्थ वाचस मदुभाष्यस्य दुर्बलः। तरो तारयेत्पानस्य स्थानांत्र संस्थव्यति ।।११३०।।
समाप्तिरिद्धांगं सर्वशास्त्राणां महाभिधानः। महिं पूजयन्ति श्रेयशाऽपि क्रिया तस्य ।।११३।।
नतु हुतवास्तं वेगिनं विपरात शरणाश्रयात्। मृषोपगभ्यते यात्रा मृगोत्तम गुणोत्तमः ।।११३।।
भिषजाद्वुपमानीयतः। पर्च प्रयत्नवानिलके प्रयादः स्याद्यप् शुचिन ।।११३३।।

A sharp poison also becomes the best drug by proper administration, (on
the contrary) even the (best) drug is reduced to sharp poison, if administered badly.
Hence, the wise person desiring for (long) life and health should not take any
medicine administered by irrational physician (quack). Indra's thunderbolt, even when
