14                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

fallen on head, may let (somebody) survive but the medicine prescribed by ignorant
(physician) can't make a patient survive. Regarding himself as wise who, without
knowing, administers medicines to the afflicted, bedridden and faithful patient; man
falls into hell even on talking with this (physician) devoid of virtue, sinner, personi-
fied death and wicked. The serpent poison is good or the intake of decocted copper or
the swallowing of red hot iron balls but (the acceptance of medicine) from one putting
on the robe of scholars is not at all (good). Receiving food, drink or money from the
surrendered patient is also not proper.

Hence the wise one aspiring to become a physician should make full effort for
acquiring good qualities so that he may become life-giver to human beings. [126-133]

तदेव युक्तं भेषजं यदारोग्याय कल्पते । स च भिषजां श्रेष्ठो रोगेभ्यो यः प्रमोक्षयेत् ॥१३४॥

That very medicine may be taken as properly administered which is capable to
bring about disease-free condition and that very physician as the best one who could
relieve (the patient) of the disorders. [134]

सम्यक्प्रयोगं सर्वेषां सिद्धिराख्याति कर्मणाम् । सिद्धिराख्याति सर्वेश गुणैर्युक्तं भिषक्षमम् ॥१३५॥

Success shows the proper application of all the measures and success, in turn,
indicates the physician endowed with all the qualities. [135]

तत्र श्लोकाः:–
आयुर्वेदागमो हेतुरागमस्य प्रवर्तनम् । सूत्रणस्याभ्यनुज्ञानमायुर्वेदस्य निर्णयः ॥१३६॥
संपूर्णं कारणं कार्यमायुर्वेदप्रयोजनम् । हेतवश्च द्रव्याद्याः । हेतवश्च ततो गौणाः संख्येयाः ॥१३७॥
रसाः षट्स्यादव्याख्यातिहेताः । गुणिनञ्ज फलिनां लेखो लटापयोगश्च कीर्तितः ॥१३८॥
मूत्रं क्षीराणि वृक्षाश्च षड् दोषगुणानुग्रहाणाम् । साधु दोषैरपि स्नेहानां दुष्कृतं तथा गुणेन ॥१३९॥
वैद्यापवादाद् वक्ष्यन्ते सर्वे ते भिषजां गुणाः । सर्वमेतत् समाख्यातं पूर्वाध्याये महर्षिणा ॥१४०॥

Now, the summing up verses–

Emergence of Āyurveda, its cause and initiation, approval of the composition,
decision of Āyurveda, entire cause, effect, object of Āyurveda, etiological factors,
doṣas, drugs, in brief, Rasas with their basic and auxiliary materials, three categories
of drugs, rooty and fruity drugs, fats, salts, urine, milks, the six trees of which latex
and barks are used, their actions, proper administration or otherwise alongwith their
merits and demerits, quacks, and qualified physicians in whom all the qualities are
found; all this has been described by the great sage in the first chapter. [136-140]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने दीर्घजीवितीयो नाम प्रथमोऽध्यायः ॥१॥

Thus ends the first chapter on longevity in Ślokasthāna in the treatise composed by
Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. [1]

                                  •
