16                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH.

udāvarta and constipation. With this very group of drugs may be prepared
unctuous enema for alleviation of vāta. Thus pañcakarma (five measures) is said in
brief. [11-14]

तान्युपस्थितादेशेभ्यामं स्नेहस्वेदोपयादे । यथा कमणि कुर्यात मात्राकाली विचारयन् ।।१५।।

These five measures may be applied to those having presence of doses after
performing unction and sweating with due consideration of dosage and time. [15]

मात्राकालग्रहा युक्तिः, सिद्धिर्युक्ती तिष्ठिता । तिक्ष्णतुपरे युक्तिको ह्रव्यज्ञवर्ता सदा ।।१६।।

Proper administration (of drugs) depends on dosage and time and success is
based on proper administration. Hence, knower of proper administration always stand
at the top among the knowers of drugs. [16]

अत ऊर्ध्व प्रवक्ष्यामि यवागूविविधयोगतः । सिद्धिवानि विकाराणां तत्सात्म्यानि निबुध ।।१७।।

Further, (I) will speak about gruels (prepared with) various drugs for alleviations of
various disorders amenable to them. [17]

पिप्पलीपिप्पलीमूलचव्यचित्रकसुण्ठिभिः । यवागूदीपनीया स्याद्बुलनी चोपशान्तिका ।।१८।।

The gruel prepared with pippalī, pippalīmūla, cavya, citraka and suṇṭhi stimu-
lates appetite and relieves (colic) pain. [18]

दधित्थबिल्वचाङ्गेरीदाडिमाम्रफलैरपि । यचना पचमी चाङ्गेर्ी, येया सग्राहे पाकभूतिका ।।१९।।

The gruel prepared with kappiṭṭha, bilva, cāṅgerī, buttermilk and pomegranates
is digestive and astringent. The liquid gruel of smaller five roots¹ is useful for
diarrhoea with vāta. [19]

शालपर्णीप्रश्निपर्ण्यो: वृहतापर्ण्य च साधिता । दाडिमाम्रा हिता येया पित्तस्त्रातिसारिणाम् ।।२०।।

The liquid gruel prepared with śālaparṇī, balā, bilva, pṛśniparṇī and soured pome-
granates is useful for paittika and ślaišmika diarrhoeas. [20]

पयसरार्धोदकं क्षीरे ह्रीबेरोत्पलमुस्तया: । येया पृश्निपर्ण्याह ह्रीवेरोत्पर्धकं च साधिता ।।२१।।

The liquid gruel Processed with hrībera, utpala, musta and pṛśniparṇī and
prepared with goat's milk having half water alleviates blood diarrhoea and so is that
prepared with pṛśniparṇī. [21]

दद्यात सातिविषां येया शाल्पे सामकं तनागरम् । कश्चुशाकण्टकारीभ्यां मूत्रकृच्छे सफानिताम् ।।२२।।

One should prescribe the gruel prepared with ativiṣā and suṇṭhi and soured (with
pomegranates) in diarrhoea having āma. That of gokṣura and kaṇṭakārī alongwith
phāṇita should be prescribed in dysuria. [22]

विडङ्गपिप्पलीमूलशिग्रुमरिचसेवनी च । तक्रेणाश्च यवागुः स्यात् क्रिमिनी सवुवर्चिका ।।२३।।

The gruel of vidaṅga, pippalīmūla, śigru and marica prepared with buttermilk
and having suvarcikā (a kind of alkali) alleviates krimis (helminths). [23]

1. śālaparṇī, pṛśniparṇī, bṛhatī, kaṇṭakārī and gokṣura.
