II]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   17

मृद्वीकासारिवालाजापिप्पलीमधुराहिगारैः । पिप्पलाणाम् विषघ्नो वा सौमराजीविष्पिचिता ॥२४॥

That prepared with drākṣā, sārivā, parched paddy, pippalī, honey and śuṇṭhī
alleviates (excessive) thirst. The one prepared with somarājī is anti-poison. [24]

दध्ना वराहनिर्वूहें यवाग्घूर्हणी मता । गवेधुकानां कृशानां कार्णीयो समाहिता ॥२५॥

The gruel prepared with pork juice is bulk-promoting. The one prepared with
fried gavedhuka alongwith honey is emaciating. [25]

सर्पिमता वहुतिला स्नेहनी लवणान्विता । श्यामाकमरकाण्ण्िभरुश्यानामुनतू चिरक्ष्णों ॥२६॥

The gruel prepared with profuse sesamum and added with ghee and salt provides
unctuousness. The one of śyāmāka prepared with decoction of kuśa and āmalaka
produces roughness. [26]

दशमूलीकृतः कासहिक्काश्वासकफापहा । यमकेन मदिरासिद्धा पाकाशयसकापहा ॥२७॥

The one prepared with ten roots¹ alleviates cough, hiccup, dyspnoea and kapha.
The one prepared with dual fat (ghee and oil) alongwith madirā (wine) alleviates pain
in colon. [27]

शाकैर्मिसतिलमांसैः: सिद्धा षर्जों निरस्यति । जम्बवाम्रास्विपिधचाम्लसिद्धा । साङ्ग्राहिकी मता ॥२८॥

That prepared with potherbs, meat, sesamum and black gram evacuates bowels.
That (prepared) with seeds of jambū and āmra (mango), sour kapittha and bilwa is
astringent. [28]

क्षारियवकहि्ङ्गयमनयवर्षेजेदेीनि मता । अम्रभापिप्पलीमूलार्विधिकर्वासातुलोमिनी ॥२९॥

That (prepared) with yavakṣāra (alkali obtained from barley plant), citraka, hiṅgu
and amlavetasa is mass-breaking. The one with harītakī, pippalīmūla and śuṇṭhī helps
carmination (passing of flatus). [29]

तक्रसिद्धा यवागूः: स्याद् धृतव्यापत्तिनाशिनी । तैलव्यापदि शस्ता स्यात्त्वाम्लकापिष्ठकसाधिता ॥३०॥

The gruel prepared with buttermilk relieves of untoward effects caused by (ex-
cessive intake of) ghee. The one prepared with buttermilk and sesame paste is useful
in conditions caused by (excessive intake of) oil. [30]

गव्यमांसरसैः: सामा वियवाग्बानामिनी । कफाजपा यवानी यमके पिप्पलमालकैः ॥३१॥

The gruel prepared with beef juice and soured with pomegranates alleviates in-
termittent fevers. The one prepared from barley in ghee and oil with pippalī and āmalaka
is useful for throat. [32]

ताम्रचूडं से सिद्धा रेतोमार्गरजायदा । समाविदेदना शच्या वृहदीरोपसादिता ॥३२॥

That prepared in chicken juice alleviates pain in seminal passage. That with split
black grams prepared in ghee and milk is aphrodisiac. [32]

1. bilwa, agnimantha, śyonāka, gambhārī, pāṭalā, śālaparṇī, pṛśniparṇī, bṛhatī, kaṇṭakārī
   and gokṣura. The first five are called as bigger roots (bṛhat pañcamūla) and the latter one
   as smaller roots (laghu pañcamūla). Both together make daśamūla (ten roots).

8 C.S.-I
