24                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH.

    Five types of extract preparations are expressed juice, paste, decoction, cold
infusion and hot infusion.

    (Juice expressed out of a drug by mechanical pressure is svarasa. Kalka is a
lump of drug ground with some liquid. Physicians say that śrta (kvātha) which is
prepared by boiling a drug on fire. When a drug is kept in hot water for the whole
night the extract thus obtained is known as śīta. Phāṇṭa is the preparation in which a
drug is put in hot water for a while and gently sifted.

    Their potency is in preceding order, thus (administration of) extract preparations
depend on severity of disease and strength of the patient, they are not all useful eve-
rywhere (indiscriminately). [7]

'पञ्चाशन्महाकषाया' इति यदुक्तं तदुपव्याख्यास्यामः; षष्ठ्या—जीवनीयो बृंहणीयो लेखनीयो भेदनीयः संशमनीयो
दीपनीय इति षट्कषायः; वाचो बलाः; संग्राहो इति कषायः; कण्ठ्याः; कुशलाः; कुष्ठाः;
कण्ठः; त्रिमिरो विपना इति षट्कः; काशायवर्गः; स्तन्यजनन; स्तन्यशोधन; शुक्रजनन; शुक्रशोधन इति षट्कः;
कषायवर्गः; स्नेहोपग मल्यापोहो विरेकोपग आस्थापनोपगो नुवासनोपगो; शिरोविरेचनोपग इति सप्तकः
कषायवर्गः; छर्दिनिग्रहणस्तृष्णानिग्रहणो दिक्षानिग्रहण इति त्रिकः; कषायवर्गः; मूत्रविसंग्रहणीयो; मूत्रविरजनीयो मूत्रसंग्रहणीयो
मूत्रजनने मूत्रविरेचनीय इति पञ्चकः; कषायवर्गः; वेदनास्थापन; कासहर इति पञ्चकः;
वेदनास्थापनं; संज्ञास्थापन वयः-स्थापन इति पञ्चकः कषायवर्गः; मूलस्थापन उर्दिग्रहणस्थापनः मूत्रसंग्राहक इति
कषायवर्गः; वाङ्मूलस्थापन इति कषायवर्गः; शीतिप्रशमनस्थापनो उर्दिग्रहणस्थापनः मूत्रसंग्राहक इति महत् च
कषायाणां लक्षणोदाहरणाय व्याख्यात भवति । तेषामेकैकस्मिन् महाकषाये दश दशवर्गस्विकानि कषायव्याख्यास्यामः।
तानेव पञ्च कषायाणि भवन्ति ।।८।।

    Fifty great extractives, as said above, will now be described. They are—

Group   I– consisting of six extractives such as vitaliser, bulk-promoting, ema-
            ciating, mass-breaking, union-promoting and appetiser.

Group  II– consisting of four extractives–tonic, complexion-promoting, benefi-
            cial for throat and cordial.

Group III– comprising of six extractives–anti-saturative, anti-haemorrhoidal,
            anti-dermatosis, anti-pruritic, anthelmintic and anti-poison.

Group  IV– having four extractives–galactogoue, galactodepurant, semen-pro-
            moting and semen-depurant.

Group   V– consisting of seven extractives such as sub-oleative, sub-diaphoretic,
            sub-emetic, sub-purgative, sub-corrective enemata, sub-unctuous
            enema and sub-errhines.

Group  VI– comprising of three extractives–anti-emetic, anti-dypsic and anti-
            hiccup.
