34                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

secretion. The vision is predominant in tejas and as such is specially susceptible to
kapha. Hence the measures alleviating kapha are beneficial for clarifying the vision.
A sharp collyrium should not be applied to eyes at day because the vision already
weak due to evacuation is further depressed in the sun. Hence it is desirable certainly
that the evacuative collyrium be applied only at night. [15-17]

यथा हि कनकाद्यानां मलिनां विविधात्मनाम् ॥१८॥
धौतानां निर्मला शुद्धिलेलोवलोऽसक्तादिधिः । एवं नेतेषु मर्त्यानामेतद्वानोेद्यावातिभिः ॥१९॥
दृष्टिरैनीकुला भाति निर्मले नभसीन्दुवत् ।

As various types of metals like gold etc. when dirty become stainlessly clean
after washing with oil, cloth, and hair (brush) etc., the vision in eyes of the mortal
ones brightens undisturbed like moon in the clear sky by (application of) collyrium,
eye drops etc. [18-19]

हरेणुकां प्रियंगुं च पृष्ठीकां केशरं नखम् ।।२०।।
ह्रीबेरं चन्दनं चर्च त्वगेलोप्लपद्मकम् । व्याधघकं मधुकं मांसी गुग्गुलुस्तगरुर्वयम् ।।२१।।
न्यग्रोधोदुम्बरप्लक्षलोहप्रवकान्यं । शुभाः । वन्यं सर्जरसं सुरसं शैलेयं कमलोत्पलम् ।।२२।।
श्रीवेष्टकं शल्लकीन्न शुष्कचन्दयनादि च । पिण्ड्या निसमैःक्षपयैर्वा तो वा सर्वं घरसर्विघाण् ।।२३।।
अङ्गुष्टसन्मितां कुर्यादङ्गलायतसमाम् बिषकम् । शुष्कं निगच्छं ताँ वर्तिं धूमनेत्रादिषितं नरः ।।२४।।
स्नेहैः साध्यभिसंयुक्तां पिबेद्ग्वाधायिष्कौ सुखाम् ।

Hareṇukā, priyaṅgu, pṛthvīkā, keśara, nakha, hrībera, candana, patra, twak, elā,
uśīra, padmaka, dhyāmaka, madhuka, māṃsī, guggulu, aguru, śarkarā, bark of
nyagrodha, udumbara, aśwattha, plakṣa and lodhra, vanya, sarjarasa, musta, śaileya,
kamala, utpala, śrīveṣṭaka, śallakī and śhauneyaka–all these should be ground and
pasted on a reed so as to make it a stick, barley-shaped, thumb-like and of eight
fingers in length. The person should take this stick when dried and with free interior,
put it on the smoking pipe and having added some fat and ignited should smoke as a
daily routine for happiness. [20-24]

वसायुतमधूच्छिष्टेमुंस्मिधुमुलिनीर्विभि: । १२१५।।
वर्ति मधुरकैः: कृत्वा स्नेहैर्बद्धं धूममापबेतु ।

One should use unctuous smoking with stick made of useful drugs of sweet group
added properly with fat, ghee and bee- wax. [25]

श्वेता ज्योतिष्मती चैव हरितालं मनःशिला ।।१६।।
गन्धाइगुर्प्रदशा धूपं धूर्विसरेचने ।

For evacuation of head, the smoking made of śwetā, jyotiṣmatī, orpiment, realgar
and the aromatic substances (of agurvādya guṇa-see ci. 3.267) beginning with aguru
and patra (leaving kustha and tagara) should be used. [26]

गौरवं शिरसः शूलं पीनसार्धावभेदकी ।।२७।।
कर्णाक्षिशूलं कासश्च हिक्काश्वासे गलग्रहः: । दन्तदौर्बल्यमाखावः क्रोत्रघ्राणाक्षिदोषजम् ।।२८।।
