36                          CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                          [CH.

स्नेहिकं धूमने रोधे वायुः पित्तानुगे यदि । शीतं तु रक्तपित्ते व्याख्युलेच्छिलिते विरेकयुगम् ।।४०।।

In such case, intake of ghee, snuff, collyrium and saturating diet is desirable. In
case of complications due to smoking, these should be unctuous if vāyu follows pitta,
cold in raktapitta and roughening in kapha-pitta. [39]

पर तत्र। प्रक्षाल्य धूमो सेव्यो विपर्यये। न तिरिश्चैः विवेट्टयुज् न कुले बलिबकणम् ।।४१।।
न गर्भे न विषार्त्तेषु न शूर्पिणि। न क्रुधे न नास्ते न क्षीणे न पित्ते न वायिर्लकम् ।।४२।।
न मूर्च्छाप्रमादार्त्त न तृषिते न कृशे न च। न भुक्त्वा मधुतैलान्यां न च तर्पणभोजिने ।।४३।।
धूमं न भुनता दाना न च भक्षः कुच्छ् एव च। न तालुगते न रोहिण्यां न मे न श्रेणे न च वाशिकायाम् ।।४४।।
न शङ्के न रोहिण्यां न मे न तन्मुखकाद्धि मोहाच् वियति यो नर: ।।४५।।
रोगास्तस्य प्रवर्तन्ते दारणा भूमिशयात् ।

Now I shall say about those for whom smoking is contra-indicated. One should
not smoke after purgation, enema and bleeding; when afflicted with poison, anxiety,
pregnant, in case of fatigue, narcosis, āma, pitta, vigil, fainting giddiness, thirst,
emaciation, injury; after taking wine, milk, fatty substances and honey, food with
curd; in conditions of roughness, anger, dryness of palate, defects of vision, head
injury, Śankhaka, rohini, prameha and alcoholism. One who smoke in these condi-
tions and untimely due to carelessness, the disorders aggravate severely due to com-
plication of smoking. [41-45]

धूमयोगः पिनद्धोऽग्निः सिरोग्राणशिरःश्लेष्म ।।४६।।
प्राणनासन्ते कण्ठेन धूम्येन भस्यणं। आत्येने भुमकमानु पिच्छ् प्रायेण योहदेव ।।४७।।
प्रतिलोमं गतो धूमो हिरश्विन्द्रि बधाभुयी ।

One should smoke through nostrils in disorders located in head,
nose and eyes, and through mouth in those of throat. While smoking through nostrils,
one should emit through mouth but while smoking through mouth, one should not
emit through nostrils because the smoke traversing reversely damages the eyes imme-
diately. [46-47]

बन्धनञ्च प्रत्येकस्ये: धूमपाशिविधिक्रमम् ।
विबिदेशाद्धि पिपया नासया धूमपालयम् ।

One should smoke through one nostril closing the other one three rounds, thrice
in each round, cautiously while sitting comfortably with straight body and eyes and
concentrated mind. [48]

चतुर्विंशतिकं वंशं संग्राहीलिनिचिने ।।४९।।
द्वात्रिंशदङ्गुले स्नेहे त्रयोत्रिंशद्वधिक्रमे ।

The smoking pipe should be, by own fingers, of twenty four fingers length
in evacuation, of thirty two fingers in unction and of thirty six fingers in routine
smoking. [49]

बतु विरेकाणनिलिके कोलाश्रयप्रपाणिगणम् ।।५०।।
बलिन्नेरसमस्यर्थं धूमने प्रशस्यते ।
