VI                                    SŪTRASTHĀNA                                         39

    Tongue-scrapers should be made of gold, silver, copper, tin and brass and should
be non-sharp and curved.

    The dirt which is collected at the root of the tongue and which creates obstruction in respiration produces foul smell, hence one should scrape tongue. [71-75]

धार्यणपायेन वैशद्यशिवेताग्नमतिनाडाः ॥७५॥
जातिकटुकुणगानं लवङ्गस्य फलानि च ।
कक्कोलस्य फलं च शाम्बुलस शुभं तथा । तथा कर्पूरविधिः सूक्ष्मैलायः फलानि च ॥७७॥

    One desiring clarity, relish and fragrance should keep in mouth the fruits of Jāti,
katuka, pūga and lavanga; kakkola (fruit), auspicious leaves of betel, exudate of camphor and fruits of smaller cardamom. [76-77]

हन्योर्बलं स्वरबलं वर्धतेऽधसः पर: । न स्याद् पर न रसाजनमं च शिथिरतम् ॥८१॥
न चास्य कदाचिद्यौ: स्यादौलीयौः सुदन्तधरः । न च दन्तः खुदरुस भवति ब्राह्म बलिष्ठ भवन्ति च ॥७१॥
न शूलकं च वालेन हस्यन्ति च । भवन्ति दृढ़ता खादेयुर्मांसमशेलाचणिणाप्रणाम ॥८०॥

    Use of oil gargle provides strength in jaws and voice, development of face,
maximum taste and relish in food. The person (practising this) does not suffer from
dryness of throat, there is no fear of lip-cracking, teeth are not affected with caries
rather they become firm-rooted. They (teeth) are not painful nor are they oversensitive on sour-tasting, they become able to chew even the hardest food items. [78-80]

नित्यं स्नेहाभिशिरः गिरः,शूलं न जाते । न खालित्यं न पालित्यं न केशाः प्रपतन्ति च ॥८१॥
बलं शिरः कपालानां विवर्धतेभिनाभिषतः । बुद्धशाल सौर्गणगुणः कृष्णाः केशाः भवन्ति च ॥८२॥
इन्द्रियाणि प्रसन्नि च सुखभवति विशालाः; सुखं च स्याग्निद्रीं तीलिणनिप्रसारणाम ॥८३॥

    One who smears his head with unctuous substance daily does not suffer from
headache, alopecia, greying of hair, nor do his hairs fall. By applying oil on head
regularly, strength of skull-parts increases particularly, hairs become firm-rooted, long
and black, sense organs become cheerful and the face with pleasant glow alongwith
sound sleep and happiness. [81-83]

न कर्णिरोगा गरुलोश्ना न मन्यादुनीकः । सौवचे: कुनिते बाधिर्यं स्यात्किमिषं कर्णमैलिणाम् ॥८४॥

    By saturating ears with oil daily, ear diseases due to vāta, stiffness of backneck
and jaws, hard hearing and deafness do not occur. [84]

स्नेहभ्यङ्गाधया कुम्भश्च स्नेहाविविर्धते । भयलुण्ठाइसशस्त दृढ: वलेणलशी घमा ॥८५॥
तथा शरीरभ्यङ्गदूर सुष्ल च जायते । प्रशान्नवातवाधाय वलेणशेवाधायारेसदुढ़: ॥८६॥

    As a pitcher by moistening with oil, skin by pressing with oil and axis (of a cart)
with lubrication become strong and jerk-resistant, so by oil massage the body
becomes firm, smooth-skinned, free from disturbances of vāta and tolerant of exertions and exercise. [85-86]

स्पर्शनेऽभ्यधिको वायुः स्पर्शनं च लघागतिसृत । लघ्यश्च परमभ्यासगतं शीलेवेदित: ॥८७॥
