40                              CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                              [CH.

Vāyu is predominant in tactile sense organ which again is located in skin, oil
massage is the most beneficial for skin, hence one should use it regularly. [87]

न चाभिघाताभिहतं गजयम्पदुसेविः । विकारं भजतेऽनल्यं बलान्वमणि वा कृचित् ।।८८।।
सुस्पर्शोपचिताङ्गश्च सलवान् त्रिमदर्शनः । पथलम्भाङ्गुलितालप्राप्तोऽम्पजर एव च ।।८९।।

The body of one who uses oil massage regularly does not become affected much
even if subjected to accidental injuries, or strenuous work. By using oil massage daily,
a person is endowed with pleasant touch, trimmed body parts and becomes strong,
charming and least affected by old age. [88-89]

खतवतं तलमता रौक्ष्यं श्रमं गुरुत्वञ्च पादयोः । मद्द पर्योगसाम्नि पादाम्भ्यङ्गविनियोगात् ।।९०।।
जायते स्रीगुमतां च वलवं स्थैर्यं च पादयोः । दृष्टिः प्रसादं लभते वातात्लीपशामनता ।।९१।।
न च स्याद् गृध्रसीरोगः पादयोः स्कुटनं न च । न शिरावल्गुपर्वभेदकोषः पादाम्भ्यङ्गेन पादयोः ।।९२।।

By massaging of oil in feet, coarseness, stiffness, roughness, fatigue and
numbness of feet are alleviated in no time. Further, delicacy, strength and firmness in
feet, clarity of vision are attained and vāta is pacified. By massage of oil in feet, there
is no occurrence of sciatica, craking of sole and constriction of blood vessels and
ligaments. [90-92]

दौर्गन्ध्यं गौरवं तन्द्रां कण्डूं मलमरोचकम् । स्वेदबीभत्सतां हन्ति शरीरपरिमार्जनम् ।।९३।।

Rubbing over the body alleviates foul smell, heaviness, drowsiness, itching, dirt,
anorexia and vulgar appearance of sweat. [93]

यात्रिकं स्नेयमायुधं मानसदेदाप्तबाधुम् । शरीरबलनान्यतं स्नानमोजस्करं परम् ।।९४।।

Bathing is purifying, aphrodisiac, life-promoting, destroyer of fatigue, sweat and
dirt, resuscitative and a good promoter of ojas. [94]

कार्यं वशनपायुसेवत्खशौचीं स्नेयेण भ्येत् यात्रिकं स्वेत निर्मलाम्बरधारणात् ।।९५।।

Wearing clean clothes enhances charm, fame, life span; removes inaus-
piciousness, produces pleasure, auspiciousness and eligibility for a congregation. [95]

सूत्रं सौगन्धमायुष्यं कान्यं पुरिदेहदाद्भुतम् । सौगन्धपाहात्त्याहीं गद्यमाघमनिनोगनम् ।।९६।।

Use of fragrance and garlands is aphrodisiac, produces good smell, longevity,
charm, nourishment and strength, pleasing manners and destroys inauspicious-
ness. [96]

मणपं महत्त्वमायुष्यं श्रीमत्द्युतनरागुणम् । हणपं कमुप्योजस्यं रत्नामार्गधारणात् ।।९७।।

Wearing of jems and ornaments promotes, wealth, auspiciousness, longevity,
prosperity; destroys calamity, produces happiness, charms and ojas. [97]

नेत्रयं पवित्रमायुष्यलक्ष्मीकलिनाशनम् । पाद्योनीनासामार्गाणी शौचात्मानम्भचीशानम् ।।९८।।

Cleaning of feet and excretory orifices frequently promots intelligence, purity,
longevity, and destroys inauspiciousness and dirt. [98]

पौतिकं स्नेयमायुष्यं शुचि द्रुपरिरत्नम् । केशश्मश्रुनखादीनां कल्पवं सर्वशामनम् ।।९९।।
