V]                            SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   41

Cutting of hair, beard, moustaches, nail etc. and hair-dressing is nutritive, aph-
rodisiac, life-promoter, and provides cleanliness and beautification. [99]

चक्षुष्यं स्पर्शनहितं पादयोर्ब्वसनापहम् । बल्यं परक्रमसुखं वृष्यं पादत्राणधारणम् ॥१००॥

Use of foot wears is beneficial for eye-sight and tactile sense-organ, is destro-
yer of calamity to feet and promotes strength, ease in display of energy and
libido. [100]

विषे: प्रशमनं बल्यं गुप्त्यावरणसाधकम् । पर्यापिःचरैश्मानुष्छं छत्रारणमुच्यते ॥१०१॥

Use of umbrella alleviates natural calamities, provides strength, protection, cov-
ering and well being and guards against the sun, wind, dust and rains. [101]

स्खलनं: संप्रतिष्ठानं स्त्युष्टिं च निसूदनम् । अवज्ञभ्यमायुष्यं भवनं दण्डधारणम् ॥१०२॥

Use of stick supports a slipping person, averts enemies, gives strength and lon-
gevity and destroys fears. [102]

नगरी नगरस्येव रथस्येव रथी यथा । स्वशरीरस्य मेधावी कृत्यव्यवहितो भवेत् ॥१०३॥

As a civic is cautious in the duties of the city and a charioteer in those of the
chariot, a wise person should be cautious in duties relating to his own body. [103]

भवति चात्र–
वृत्त्युपायान्विशेषेत न स्मृतिर्मविरोधिनः । शुभमन्वष्ठयन्न चैव सुखमेव समुनुते ॥१०४॥

Here is said–

One should take up those means of livelihood which are not contradictory to
dharma (social and religious ethics). Likewise, he should pursue life of peace and
study. Thus he enjoys happiness. [104]

तत्र श्लोकाः:–
मात्रा द्रव्याणि मात्रां च लक्षिधां गुरुलाघवम् । द्रव्याणां गहितोऽेत्यभ्यसो येषो, येषो च शरस्वं ॥१०५॥
अङ्गस्वै गृयान्विहितं त्रिविध वर्तिकल्पना । धूमपत्नमुपाः कालः; पानमात्रा च यस्य यत् ॥१०६॥
व्यापनिषिद्धं वैषण्य धूमो येषां विगहितिः । येयो यदा वन्यो च नैतं यच्छ च चाह्विषम् ॥१०७॥
नस्यकर्मगुणा नस्तःकार्य यच्च यदा । भङ्गवेधानयनं येषां चक्षुःस्वगुणं च यत् ॥१०८॥
गण्डूकरंणिकयुनिगुणामैत्रैले न्यञ्जनगुणाः । इंद्नस्मे अयसरसंलमुभनायूयाभ्यो च यल ॥१०९॥
कर्णेष्वै तद्ध्यु पादायोअस्य र्द्धानम्बः । स्नानं बालंसिं श्वुरं च सौगन्ध्यं सस्र्वार्णाङ्कात् ॥११०॥
शोचे संहरणं लोहन्नां पादचरण्यवारणम् । गुणा मात्राशितीयेऽस्मिन्यासथा दण्डधारणाम्वस्ति ॥१११॥

Now the summing up verses–

Quantity, substances, heaviness and lightness in quantity, substances
the practice of which is undesirable and recommended, collyrium, smoking stick, three
types of smoking stick, properties of smoking, its timings and measures, signs and
symptoms of adverse use, treatment, the persons for whom smoking is contra-indi-
cated, the method of smoking, materials and types of smoking pipe, properties of
snuffing, mode and times of snuffing, the method of tooth-brush and its properties,

11 C.S.-I
