44                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

not get proper fuel (diet), it absorbs the bodily rasa that is why the cold vāyu is
vitiated during the cold season. So during hemanta, one should use the unctuous,
sour and salted juice of the meat of dominantly fatty aquatic and marshy animals and
also meat of burrow-dwelling and prasaha (who eat by snatching) types of animals.
After this the person should drink wine, vinegar and honey. One does not lose life-
span if he takes regularly milk products, cane sugar products, fats, oil, new rice and
hot water during hemanta. One should use massage, anointing, head oil, heated
chamber, sun, heated rooms above and underground. During cold season, one should
use carriages, beds and seats well-covered and spread over with heavy sheets made
of wool, silk, skin, hair-braids and variegated blankets. The clothes should be heavy
and warm and he should apply thick paste of aguru on his body. While on bed, he
should sleep, embracing well-developed women having big and prominent breasts
and anointed the body with aguru paste, with exhilaration and libido and enjoy sexual
intercourse upto full satisfaction at the advent of śiśira. When winter begins, one
should avoid vāta-increasing and light food and drinks, restricted diet, strong winds
and intake of cold drinks. [9-18]

हेमन्तशिशिरौ तुल्यौ शिशिरेऽर्थं विशेषणम् । रौक्ष्यमादानजं शीतं मेघमारुतवर्षजम् ॥१९॥
तस्माद्विनिविशः; सर्व: शिशिरे विधिरिष्यते । निवातायानि लघूनि शिशिरे गृहमध्यगैः ॥२०॥
कटुतिक्तकषायाणि यालानानि लघूनि च । वर्जयेद्वसायानि शिशिरे शीतलानि च ॥२१॥

Hemanta and śiśira are similar with the slight difference that the latter has more
roughness due to (beginning of) ādāna and due to clouds, winds and rains. Hence
the entire routine of living prescribed for hemanta is applicable to śiśira as well. Dur-
ing śiśira, one should reside in a house which is more wind-free and heated. During
śiśira, one should avoid pungent, bitter, astringent, light, cold and vāta-increasing
food and drinks. [19-21]

वसन्ते निचितः श्लेष्मा दिनकृद्भामिरीरितः: । कायाग्नि बाधते रोगांस्ततः प्रकुरूते बहून् ॥२२॥
तस्मादुसन्ते कर्मोणि वमनादीनि कारयेत् । गुर्वम्ललनेशयाद्यूरं दिवास्वपनं च वर्जयेत् ॥२३॥
व्यायामोद्वर्तनं धूमं कवलग्रहमञ्जनम् । सुखाम्बुना शौचविधिं शिलयेद् कुसुमागमे ॥२४॥
चन्दनागुरुदिग्धाङ्गो यवगोधूमभोजनः: । शार्भमं शाशमधूर्यं मांसं लावकपिञ्जल्नयम् ॥२५॥
भक्षयेविषयनानि पिबेन्माध्वीकमेव वा । वसनारुचुमेव चौण्या कासनान्या च पीवत्म् ॥२६॥

During spring, the accumulated kapha irritated by the strong rays of the sun
disturbs the body-heat and thus causes many diseases. Hence, during spring, evacua-
tive measures like vomiting etc. should be applied and heavy, sour, fatty and
sweet diet as well as day-sleep should be avoided. One should use regularly during
blossoming of flowers (spring) physical excercise, anointing, smoking, gargles,
collyrium and bath etc. with warm water. He should use paste of sandal and aguru
