on the body and diet mainly consisting of barley and wheat. During spring, one should
eat meat of śarabha (wapiti), śaśa (hare), eṇa (antelope), lāva (common quail) and
kapijñala (grey partridge) and drink harmless vinegars and wines. Thereafter, he should
enjoy the blossoming beauty of women and forests. [22-26]

मयूर्जेर्जित: स्नेहे भीमे पेयोपेते रतिः । स्वादु शीतं द्रवं निन्नमयमापाय तदा हितम् ॥२७॥
शीतं सराकारं मन्थं आझलान्नगुरुभिः । पृथु पय: सशास्त्रस्य भवतु क्रीमे न सेविते ॥२८॥
मद्यस्य न वा पेयबहुता शुभदुष्टकम् । लवणाम्लकटुष्माणि अत्याग्नि च विकर्जेत् ॥२९॥
दिवा शीतागृहे निद्रां शिखरशुचीशिरो । फलेजल्बन्दिचाम्पाः प्रयतो हर्मभतावके ॥३०॥
स्वजनेः पाणिसंस्पर्शीर्द्धन्दिवाकशिलीतैः । सेव्यमाने सजेडांगम् मुक्तामणिभिभूषितः ॥३१॥
कान्तारानि च शीतांश कुलानि प्राकृपाणि च । वीचमहाले निर्वेत भेजुयेद्विहतो रतः ॥३२॥

During summer, the sun, with his rays, draws up excessively the moisture of the
nature hence in that season, sweet, cold, liquid and fatty food and drinks are benefi-
cial. The person taking regular cold and sweet mantha (unctuous drink), meat of wild
animals and birds, ghee and milk along with rice does not suffer during summer. Wine
should be taken in a little quantity or with plenty of water or should be left altogether,
salted, sour, pungent and hot (food) and also physical exercise should be avoided.
One should take sleep in cool room during day and on the top (roof) of the mansion
with abundant air and cooled with moon rays during night, having pasted sandal
on his body. One adorned with pearls and gems should take seat having been atten-
ded with fans and hand touch which are cooled with sandal water. During summer,
one should resort to forests, cold water and flowers avoiding sexual intercourse
altogether. [27-32]

आदानदुर्बले देहे पक्षा भवति दुर्बलः । स वर्षासिलितवातादीनं दूषणैर्दुष्यते पुनः ॥३३॥
भूगन्धाभोनिदर्पाद्याः पाकाम्लसंजनस्त्व च । वयोग्याधिकतर क्षीणे शक्तिशु लयस्तादः ॥३४॥
तस्मात् साधारणः सार्वे निविर्यत्रेषु झटशते । उदस्मान् दिवातापमयमपाय वर्जेत्साम् ॥३५॥
अभयामाणाण वेत वायछते बनं वर्जेत् । पयखोजसंसर्गाहं शाखः श्लेट्मिलत् मन्थे ॥३६॥
अफानतगसमान्ये बावचतोकुलेजहिव । विश्वेशहिते श्लोकाल वर्षासिनासंसाबने ॥३७॥
अधिसंरचगाता वयंचिमुषाशया: । इदरका आहारचोचिर्भव्या मुख्या संस्कृतिः ॥३८॥
चिभेदु श्रौदभिनां संभ्रां याभोकीरिरासमु या । मांड्रकं तप्तजीर्णं या क्रीमे सारसमेव या ॥३९॥
प्रयभिदेशिनात्रागमामायपरो मर्थे । गलुजचुशाम्यन्त्र: स्यां भजेजेलेदि साथिष्कम् ॥४०॥

In the body weakened during ādāna (period), the digestion becomes poor
which is further disturbed by the disorders of vāta etc. during rainy season. Due
to earth vapour, humidity of clouds and sour pāka (transformation) of water, the
power of digestion is weakened and vāta etc. are aggravated during the rainy
season. Hence, moderate living is recommended for this season. During this
