46                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                         [CH.

period, one should avoid cold drinks, day sleep, dews, river water, physical exercise,
the sun and sexual intercourse. He should use food and drinks often mixed with
honey. During rainy season, when the day is filled with winds and rains and is much
cooler, diet having predominance of sour, salted and fatty articles should be taken
for pacification of vāyu. The person, cautiously protecting his agni (digestion), should
eat old barley, wheat and rice alongwith wild meats and prepared soups. For drinks,
wine or other types of fermented liquor mixed with honey and in a little quantity,
rain water or water from well or tank, boiled and cooled, should be used. One should
use regularly rubbing and anointing of body, bath, fragrance and garlands, light and
clean clothes and should reside in a place which is free from humidity and fit for the
rainy season. [33-40]

वर्षाशीतोष्णानां सहसैवाकैरग्निभिः । छयाणाम्पचितं पित्तं ग्रामः शरदि कुप्यति ।।४१।।
तत्राक्वान् मधुरं लघु शीतं सातिक्तकम् । पित्तप्रशमनं सेव्यं भाष्यण सुखफलदुम् ।।४२।।
लावान् कपिञ्जानेनांत्रभूकपान् शराहन् । शालींस् यवकगोधूमान् देश्यानतुनैर्विविन् ।।४३।।
तिक्तस्य सर्पिषः पानं विरेकौ रक्तमोक्षणम् । शारदामत्यये कार्यं कार्यमतीत्य च वर्जनम् ।।४४।।
वसो तैलनमध्यामधिकानुपामांसिषाम् । क्षारं दधि दिवास्वप्नं प्रावाहौं वात वर्जयेत् ।।४५।।
दिवा सूर्यांशुसंतप्तं रात्रौ चन्द्रांशुशीतलम् । जलं यत्नेन निर्दोषमगस्त्येनाविषीकृतम् ।।४६।।
हंसोदकमिति ख्यातं शारदं विमलं शुचि । स्नानपानाभिषेकेषु तद्धितं चेन्दुदर्शनम् ।।४७।।
शरदािर न भाष्याणि वासांसि शुचिरेव च । शराकले न भाष्याले प्रादोषे चेन्दुदर्शनम् ।।४८।।

During autumn, the persons having adjusted to rains and cold are suddenly ex-
posed to the heat of the sunrays which leads to aggravation of the accumulated pitta.
In that season, sweet, light, cold, slightly bitter and pitta-pacifying food and drinks
should be taken in proper quantity and with good appetite. During autumn one should
take regularly the meats of lāva (common quail), kapīñjala (grey partridge), ena (an-
telope), urabhra (sheep), śarabha (wapiti) and śaśa (rabbit), rice, barley and wheat.
One should prescribe use of bitter ghee (ghee medicated with bitter drugs), purgatives
and blood letting and avoidance of the sun during the autumn. One should avoid fat,
oil, dews, meat of aquatic and marshy animals, alkali, curd, day-sleep and easterly
wind. The water, heated with the sunrays during day and cooled with moonrays du-
ring night, cooked by time, free from defects and detoxicated by agastya (a star), is
known as 'hamsodaka' which is obtained during autumn and is clean and pure. This
water is beneficial like nectar if used in bath, drink and plunging. Garlands of sea-
sonal flowers, clean apparel and also the moonrays in early nights are recommended
during the autumn season. [41-48]
