48                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                         [CH.

बस्तिनोदनाया: शूलं मूत्रवृद्धौ शिरोरुजा । विनामो संस्ग्रहः स्याल्लिगं वृषणसंग्रहः ॥८॥
स्नेदावगाहाभ्यङ्गान् सांत्विताक्षोदकम् । मृदु प्रतिलोमे कुर्वात्त्रिविधिं बस्तिकर्म च ॥९॥

By suppression of (the urge for) urination, the symptoms caused are pain in
urinary bladder and passage, dysuria, headache, bending, stiffness in groins. In case
of obstructed urine, fomentation, tub-bath, massage, pressing quantity of ghee should
be prescribed and also the three types of Basti (enema) and catheterisation. [6-7]

पक्वाशयशिर: शूलं वातकोष्ठप्रवर्तनम् । पिण्डिकोद्वेष्टनान्येषां गुदे वायुरधोगतिः च ॥
स्नेदाभ्यङ्गावगाहेषु बस्तौ बस्तिकर्म च । हिंत प्रतिलोमं कुर्यात्पक्वान्नव्यञ्जनानि च ॥९॥

Suppression of (the urge of) defecation causes colic pain, headache, retention
of flatus and faeces, cramps in calf muscles and flatulence. In retention of faeces,
fomentation, massage, tub-bath, suppositories, and enema are prescribed and also the
food and drinks which are obstruction-removing. [8-9]

मेदे वृषणयो: शूलमनुभवन्ति रुचि शिला। हृदयाभ्यासनाच्चापि वस्तौ शिश्ने बद्धमूत्रतः च ॥
तत्राभ्यङ्गावगाहः स्यात् मदिरा छागमांसनम् । शाणिः प्ययो निरुहश्च शतः संभोजनेषु च ॥११॥

In retention of semen, the symptoms caused are pain in penis and scrotum,
body-ache, pain in cardiac region and also obstruction in urine. In that case, massage,
tub-bath, wines, chicken, rice, milk, non-unctuous enema and sexual intercourse are
prescribed. [10-11]

संग्रहो विष्णुवातापानभ्यां श्वेदनं श्वेना । जठरे शालजान्योतन् रोगः स्याद्वातिताबलम् ॥
स्नेदस्वेदाग्निवातेभ्य बस्तौ भोजनानि च । चापानि वस्ति संयुक्तं शर्म वातानुलोमनम् ॥१३॥

Suppression of flatus causes retention of faeces, urine and flatus, flatulence,
pain, exhaustion and other disorders in abdomen due to vāta. There, oleation, fomen-
tation, suppositories, food and drinks and enema and other carminative measures are
recommended. [12-13]

कण्डूकोठोऽरिषा मुखे मण्डलानि पनः स्रवः शोफ पाण्डुज्वरः कुष्टं हृल्लासःस्त्रिविसर्पजम् ।
मुक्तजेत् युक्तयाहारेण मदिरं तत्र हेत्वलम् । श्राधायप्रस्क्रन्दे युगो लघु रक्तंस्रवेषु च ॥१५॥

By suppression of vomiting, the diseases caused are itching, urticarial rashes,
anorexia, blackish spots on face, swelling, anaemia, fever, skin diseases, nausea and
erysipelas. In that case, induction of vomiting after feeding, smoking, fasting (or light
diet), blood-letting, rough diet, physical exercises and purgation are prescribed. [14-15]

मन्यास्तम्भः शिरः शूलार्धावभेदेकी इन्द्रियक्षयः: । इन्द्रियाणां च माध्यस्थ्यं स्याद्धिघ्रान्तबाधितम् ॥
तत्रोपेत्य शिरः स्कन्धे मदिरां नासिकापुटे । हिंत वातशमयायो च भुक्त्वान्नं घृतमेव च ॥१७॥

Suppression of sneezing gives rise to stiffness of side-neck, headache, facial
paralysis, migraine and weakness of sense organs. There, massage in head-neck re-
gion, fomentation, smoking, nasal drops, vāta-pacifying diet and post-meal intake of
ghee are prescribed. [16-17]
