VII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   49

हिक्का श्वासोऽरुचिः; कम्पो विबन्धो हृदयोरसोः । उद्गारनिग्रहाज्जाता विकाराःसुप्रणीतषु ॥१८॥

By suppression of eructation, the symptoms caused are hiccup, dyspnoea, ano-
rexia, tremors, obstruction in cardiac region and chest which are prone to treatment
similar to that for hiccup. [18]

विनामश्वापरस्कोथाः: सुप्तिः: कम्पः प्रवेपनम् । जृम्भायं विषमतानां सर्व वातहरश्च हितम् ॥१९॥

Suppression of yawning being causes bending, convulsion, contraction, numbness,
tremors, shaking (of the body) for which the treatment for alleviating vāta is
prescribed. [19]

कार्श्यदौर्बल्यवैवर्णमङ्गमर्दोरुचिर्श्रमः । क्षुद्विनिग्रहजान् विन्द्यात् लघु स्निग्धोष्ण भोजनम् ॥२०॥

By suppression of the urge of hunger, emaciation, weakness, disorder of com-
plexion, body-ache, anorexia and giddiness are caused for which light fatty, warm and light
diet should be prescribed. [20]

कण्ठास्ययोशोषो वाधिर्यं श्रमः: सादो ह्मदि व्यथा । पिपासानिग्रहाज्जाताः शीतं तर्पणमिष्यते ॥२१॥

Suppression of thirst gives rise to dryness of throat and mouth, deafness, fatigue,
depression, cardiac pain for which cold and saturating drinks are recommended. [21]

प्रतिश्यायोऽधिगुरुत्वमङ्गमर्दयो रसामनेत्रोगो: । हृदयेष्य, अरोचिगिद्धितास्वप्रः, वाष्पनिग्रहणात् क्षयात्स्वप्त; पानानि पलापिलास्यः ॥२२॥

The symptoms caused by suppression of tears are coryza, eye diseases, heart
diseases, anorexia, giddiness for which sleep, wines and pleasing talks are
prescribed. [22]

जृम्भाऽङ्गमर्दस्तन्द्रा च शिरोरोगोऽक्षिगौरवम् । निद्राविधारणात् स्वप्न: संवाहानाश्च तत् हराः ॥२३॥

By suppression of sleep, yawning, body-ache, drowsiness, head disorders and
heaviness in eyes are caused for which sleep and gently pressing the body are recom-
mended. [23]

गुल्महृद्रोगसंमोहाः: श्रमनिःश्वासधारणात् । जायते तत्र विश्रामो शस्तं निर्वात्वा क्रिया ॥२४॥

Suppression of breathing due to exercise causes gaseous tumour, heart diseases
and fainting. Rest and the measures for alleviating vāta are prescribed to overcome
this condition. [24]

वेगानेनषा रोगा य एते परिकीर्तिताः । इष्ठवंनुपेदुष्याज्यो वेगानेकाय द्यारयेत् ॥२५॥

The disorders caused by suppression of urges are described here. Persons desir-
ing their prevention should not hold up these urges. [25]

इमांस्तु धारयेद्धेगान् हितार्थी प्रेत्य चेह च । साहसानामशस्तानं मनोवाक्कायकर्मणाम् ॥२६॥

One desirous of well-being here and hereafter should hold up the urges of evil
ventures relating to thought, speech and action. [26]

लोभशोकभयक्रोधमानवेगान् विधारयेत् । नैर्लज्ज्येचोरागाणामभ्यासुया बुद्धिमान् ॥२७॥

12 C.S.-I
