VIII]	SŪTRASTHĀNA	51

grief, fear and exertion, the children, the old and those having aggravated vāta, those
who speak too much and loudly; are hungry and thirsty should abstain from physical
excercise.) (1-2)

उत्खाताद्विताद्भीमान् क्रमशो विरमेत्तरः । हितं क्रमेण सेव्यं क्रमक्षोपेपविद्यते ॥३६॥
प्रश्रेयावचचं तापयं क्रमः; पाद्यांशिको भवेत् । एकान्तर तृतीयैर्थ ह्नान्तर भन्नतर भया ॥३७॥

A wise person should alienate himself from the habitual malpractices gradually.
Adoption of good practices should also be in similar way. The gradual order should
be like this:–

In the first phase, alienation and adoption should be limited to the quarter por-
tion. The second phase should be on the next day and succeeding phases at the inter-
val of two and three days respectively. [36-37]

क्रमेणापचिता दोषाः; क्रमेणोपचिता गुणाः । यत्नो सान्त्वयुपभम्भपञ्चमम् भवन्ति च ॥३८॥

Demerits given up gradually and merits adopted in the same way become ever-
prevented and unshakable respectively. [38]

समप्रकृतिलक्षणाः; केत्वेत्पभदि मानवाः । दृश्यन्ते सातलाः; केचित्विपला: शलेश्मलस्तभा ॥३९॥
तेशामनृतुतः पूर्वे यातालाः; सदतुः । दोषपुगभिनं क्षीयो दैहकृतिकशालिनः ॥४०॥

From the very time of conception, some persons are having equilibrium of pitta,
vāta and kapha while others are seen vātala, pittala or śleṣmala (having predominance
of vāta or pitta or kapha).

Amongst them, those in the first category are disease-free while others
(vātala etc.) are always ill. Ever attachment of a particular doṣa is known as body
constitution. [39-40]

विपरीतगुणतोसे स्वस्थयुविनिर्विहितः । समसर्वरसं साल्यं समपातो: प्रशस्यते ॥४१॥

For them, measures of health are prescribed which are opposite to proper-
ties (of that particular doṣa). For the one having equilibrium of dhātus use of all the
rasas equally would be wholesome and is thus recommended. [41]

द्वे अधः; सप्त शिरांसि खानि स्वेदुतृस्रुवि च । मलायायानां माथ्यर्थ दूबर्माणिकैर्णेतः ॥४२॥

Two below (anus and urethra), seven in head, other channels and openings of
sweat (glands) are excretory passages which are obstructed by excreta vitiated and
increased in quantity. [42]

मल्वृद्धि गुलया लाधयालतलक्षणम् । मलयमानां दुखेन सहोसारविद्यौव च ॥४३॥

Increase in malas should be known by heaviness and decrease in those by light-
ness of the excretory passages and also by excessive constipation and elimination of
excreta respectively. [43]

तान् दोषांश्रीरादिस्य घ्याद्धीन् साघ्यानुपाचरेत् । व्याधिमेतुप्रतिद्वन्द्व-द्वंन्द्वागोकालो विचारयत् ॥४४॥
