52                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

After ascertaining the disorders with the help of signs and symptoms of doṣas,
one should treat them, if they are curable, by prescribing therapies contradictory to
the etiological factors paying due consideration to doṣa and time. [44]

विषमसंस्थमुत्तानगे रोगास्तथाद्यरे । जायन्तेऽनातुरस्यापि स्वस्थवृत्तपरो भवेत् ॥४५॥

These diseases and other ones arise in persons who do not follow the routine
prescribed for health; hence the one who wants to be disease-free should follow the
course for the healthy. [45]

माधवाइस्मयो मासि नभस्ये प्रथमे प्रवृते । हेमन्ते शरद्रन्ते वा कुयांवस्त्र्यमं च बुद्धिमान् ॥४६॥
लिनर्थचिकावशेऽर्पिादायुश्च तिरोषेषु । वलिकम्हि ततः; कुयांत् स्त्रशम्येते च बुद्धिमाने ॥४७॥
बचालनं यवायमयस्र कमें प्रयोगेद्वि धातुनू । धातुसाम्यक्रियाचैव जीरा भान्मदीयाति च ॥४८॥
विधिरेष विकाराणामनुष्पतौ निदिष्टितः । निजानामितरेषां तु घुवानीर्वोपदेक्ष्यते ॥४९॥

One should get the accumulation of doṣas evacuated in the first month of spring,
rainy season and winter. The wise should administer emetics, purgatives, enema and
snuff to those who have got their body oleated and fomented. Thereafter, one who
knows times should administer tried rasāyanas and aphrodisiac formulations in order
and according to suitability. Thus, dhātus having been stabilised in normal condition,
diseases do not arise, dhātus are promoted and aging process is slowed down. This
method for prevention of innate disorders is described here, that for others would be
described separately. [46-50]

त्यमः: प्रज्ञापराधान्मन्दिग्यैपेष: स्मृतिः । देशकालामैभिज्ञान सत्ख्ययनायायर्तनम् ॥५१॥
आगन्तूनामनुप्पत्तावेष मार्गो निदिष्टितः: । प्राज्ञः: प्रांगेच तद्-कुर्यादृद्धिं विशुपासति ॥५२॥

Forsaking the intellectual errors, Calmness of sense organs, memory, sound knowl-
edge of place, time and self and following the code of good conduct–this is the way
shown for prevention of exogenous diseases. The wise should do quite early what he
thinks wholesome for himself. [53-54]

आप्तोपदेशप्रज्ञानं प्रतिपक्तिश्च कारणम् । विकाराणामनुप्पत्तावृपयापानी च शान्तये ॥५४॥

Good knowledge of the instructions of the authorities and their implementation
is the cause (means) for prevention and alleviation of diseases. [55]

पापवृत्थयः सत्वाः; सूचकाः; कलहप्रियाः । मणीष्ठाश्निनो लुब्धाः; परदृविद्धिं; शठाः ॥५६॥
परापवादतृप्ताख्याः: रिपुस्नेहिन: । निर्षूंसात्मवचावर्माणः परिस्य नरामना । ॥५७॥

Those endowed with vicious action, leaving up urges and thought, the urges
to be held up, wholesome and unwholesome, the gradual order in adoption and giving
up the beneficial and harmful habits, diet according to constitution, disorders of the
excretory passage and their treatment, prevention and cure of diseases, persons who
should be avoided and kept company of by the wise desiring self-happiness and the
method of taking curd–about all these, the sage, born of Atri, said in the chapter of
non-suppression of urges. [63-66]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने
नवेगान्धारणीयो नाम सप्तमोऽध्यायः ॥७॥

Thus ends the seventh chapter on non-suppression of urges in Ślokasthāna
in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. (7)

                                  •
