VIII]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                53

    Those with vicious action, speech and thought, informers, quarrelsome, who
ridicule the vulnereble points, the greedy, envious of other's prosperity, crooked,
who indulge in blackmailing others, the unstable, those who serve the enemy, cruel,
who have given up the virtuous path-such mean persons should be avoided. [56-57]

दुर्विद्यानाम्-शीलैर्वत्तस्तिमभागिभिः । बुद्धिवृत्तिमतां भुखः स्वभावता गत्छयाः ॥९६॥
सुषुखः सर्वभूतानां प्रशान्तः शितिकाशनः । सेव्या: समागतास्तारः धत्परब्यपदर्शिनः ॥९७॥

    Those endowed with wisdom, learning, age, good conduct, memory and balanced
mind, aged, having company of the aged, knowers of nature, free from pains, good
looking to all, peaceful; who have taken some (virtuous) vow, preachers of good con-
duct, whose narrative and sight are virtuous–should be kept company of with humility
and sense of service. [58-59]

आहारचारयोस्तु सुखार्थी तेव धेष्ठ च । परं यत्नमानोष्ट्रेदुभावना हितसेवने ॥६०॥

    The wise, who desires happiness here and hereafter, should make best effort to
practise the wholesome in respect of diet, conduct and actions. [60]

न नक्तं दधि भुञ्जीत न घृतशर्कराहीनम् । नाग्रामूष नाशीतं योग्मा पामलकीहितम् ॥६१॥
रजप्रियतयाजिकेकुलचयापवन्धनम् । प्राप्यावातनितं भोगी तित्व विमति रोगियि: ॥६२॥

    One should not take curd in night, without ghee and sugar, without soup of green
gram, honey or āmalaka and that which is hot. One fond of curd and using it reck-
lessly suffers from fever, innate haemorrhage, erysipelas, anemia, giddiness and severe
jaundice. [61-62]

तब श्लोकाः—

वेगा वेगनमुत्थाश रोगास्तेशां च भेषजम् । वेगा वेगा विधारणीय पदर्थ मविधाहितम् ॥६३॥
उचित मानहितं सेव्यं तत्रुतिवि क्रम: । मलप्रसूर्गाट मार्गों तद्वारे नलावगत्रविधेयम् ॥६४॥
भविज्ञानुपयोगी च मार्गस्य तु विनिग्रहे: । संख्याञ्च दुष्ठा पुष्ठा भीचाञ्च३ मेधावत्वादनुनिः ॥६५॥
विधिना दधि सेव्यं च वेग वत्समन्तद्विजैः । अत्रेयानागरणेऽप्यस्ये सर्ववावदतुनुनिः ॥६६॥

    Now the summing up verses–

    Urges, diseases caused by holding up these urges and their treatment, the urges
to be held up, wholesome and unwholesome, the gradual order in adoption and giving
up the beneficial and harmful habits, diet according to constitution, disorders of the
excretory passage and their treatment, prevention and cure of diseases, persons who
should be avoided and kept company of by the wise desiring self-happiness and the
method of taking curd–about all these, the sage, born of Atri, said in the chapter of
non-suppression of urges. [63-66]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तत्वे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने
वेगानावारणीयो नाम सप्तमोऽध्यायः ॥७॥

    Thus ends the seventh chapter on non-suppresion of urges in Ślokaśthāna
in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redcated by Caraka. (7)

                                    •
