SŪTRASTHĀNA 55

पञ्चेन्द्रियाधिष्ठानानि- अक्षिणी कर्णौ नासिके जिह्वा त्वक् चेति ।।१०।।

Eyes, ears, nostrils, tongue and skin-these five are locations of sense organs. [10]

पञ्चेन्द्रियार्थाः - शब्दस्पर्शरूपरसगन्धाः ।।११।।

Five sense objects are-sound, touch, vision, taste and smell. [11]

पञ्चेन्द्रियज्ञानं- चक्षुःश्रोत्रघ्राणरसनस्पर्शनानां; तः पुनरिन्द्रियार्थसंयोगसमुत्थमक्षणिकं, निश्चयात्मकञ्च,
इत्येतत् पञ्चविधज्ञानम् ।।१२।।

Five sense perceptions are visual perception etc. These are produced by the
contact of sense organ, sense object, mind and self. They are momentary and deter-
minative. This is about five pentads. [12]

मनो मनोर्थो बुद्धिरात्मा चैतच्चात्मगुणयोगसंसर्गः; शुभाशुभप्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिहेतुश्च, उभयलिङ्गं च कर्म; चतुष्पात्
क्रियेति ।।१३।।

Mind, objects of mind, intellect and self are, in brief, the substances and quali-
ties pertaining to self. This entire group is the cause of inclination towards and ab-
staining from auspicious and inauspicious acts respectively. Action (also) known as
therapeutic measures is dependent on substance. [13]

तत्रानुमानगम्यानां पञ्चमहाभूतविकारसमुद्भवानामपि साम्निन्द्रियाणां तेजश्चक्षुः, खं श्रोते, ज्ञाणो
जिह्वाः; आपो रसे, स्पर्शेऽत्र विशेषोपजीवति विशेषत्वात्तत्त्विन्द्रियं विशेषाद्धात्वात्मकमेतद्यानुगृहाति,
तत्स्वभावाभिव्युत्पात्यम् ।।१४।।

Among the existent sense organs which are comprehensible by inference and are
composed of combination of the resultants of five mahābhūtas-the visual, auditory,
olfactory, gustatory and tactile organs-have predominance of tejas, ākāśa, pṛthvī, ap
and vāyu respectively. Thus the sense organs perceive the respective objects accord-
ing to predominance of their constituent mahābhūta, because of their similarity of
nature and (specific) capability (for sense perception). [14]

तदसभिष्योगातियोगमिथ्यायोगात् समनस्कस्येन्द्रियाणां विषयेभ्यः प्रवृत्तिः, विकृतिरिन्द्रियज्ञानं संपद्यते,
युक्तः प्रकृतिसमं यथावत् सम्यक् संपद्यते ।।१५।।

In case of the sense organs alongwith the mind having been deranged due to
excessive, negative and perverted conjunction with their sense objects, the respective
sense perception gets disturbed. Again with their balanced use when all this returns
to normalcy, it promotes the respective sense perception. [15]

चरसस् विषयमर्थः; । तत्र मनसो मनोबुद्धेश्च त एव समानातिहीनमिथ्यायोगाः; प्रकृतिविकृतिहेतवो
भवन्ति ।।१६।।

The object of mind is that which can be thought of. The balanced, excessive,
negative and perverted conjuctions are the causes of normalcy and abnormality of
mind and its sense perception. [16]
