60                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

One should not insult noble persons and preceptors, nor should one perform
spells, worship of the sacred place and the honourable persons and study while
unclean. [23]

न विद्युत्सनातीष्वौ नाभूदितासु दिशु नाऽग्निसंज्वाले न भूमिकम्पे न महोत्सवे गोसंक्रान्ते न महाग्रहोपगमे न सयद्वयोर्मुखयुद्धग्रहणीयातितारायं न तारायं न ग्रहणे न विस्तरे नाभ्युक्त्वातिथीषु; स्वरेच्छाप्रत्याभ्याचारे ।।२४।।

One should not study when there is unseasonal lightening, quarters look as if
they are lighted during outbreak of fire, earth quake, grand festivals, fall of meteors,
eclipse of big planets (solar or lunar); on the date of new moon, in dawn and dusk,
without having been instructed by the preceptor's mouth, one should not pronounce
words in low, high, weak or deranged voice, without proper accents, neither too fast
nor too slow, with excessive impotency and neither with too high nor too low pitch of
sound. [24]

नातिसमये यज्ञाः, न नियमं भित्वाश्, न वर्कं नादेशे चरेत्, न सम्यासभ्यमहाखाध्यचन्द्रकीदप्रसेवी स्यात्, न बालवृद्धतमूर्खापितकक्षकेलीः; सह सख्यं कुर्यात्, न मद्यद्यूतवेश्यासंसर्गरतः स्यात्, न गुह्यं विस्तृणुयात्, न कञ्चिदाशयेत्, नाऽहमीना नकुशलीन दोन्नीना न मत्सरी स्यात्, न ब्राह्मणान् गामादाय दण्डेन हन्यात्, न गुरून् नाऽऽचार्यान् नोत्तमपापजनान् नृपान् परिक्षिपेत्, न बहुवाचा स्यात्, न ज्ञातीन् परित्यजेत्, न संकटसमये ये तिष्ठन्ति ये च रहस्याभिज्ञाः बन्धिक्षुव्णाः ।।२५।।

One should not give up the traditional practices nor should one be in habit
of breaking rules, one should not move in night and to improper place. One should
not eat, study, perform coitus or sleep in dawn and dusk; one should not make
friendship with the boys, the old, the greedy, the fools, the afflicted and the eunuchs.
One should not have interest in wine, gambling and prostitutes. One should not
disclose secrets nor should one insult anybody; one should not be conceited, un-
skilled, unfavorite and envious. One should not insult the brāhmaṇas nor should one
take up the sticks to (beat) the cow; one should not abuse the old, the preceptors, the
administrative class and the king, one should not speak too much nor should one
turn out kins, persons attached, that who stood along in difficult times and the person
who knows the secrets. [25]

नाऽतिरो नालुचिहर्षाः स्यात्, नाभूमृणुयाः, नाधिकारवस्त्रजनः, वैकः सुखं, न दुःखशीलाचारोपचारः, न सर्वाभिसम्भवी, न सर्वाभिमृड़ी, न सर्वकालवितर्की ।।२६।।

One should not be impatient or over-exhilarated; one should not be that who has
not supported his attendants, confided in his kins, is happy alone and has unpleasant
conduct, behaviour and attendance. One should not confide or suspect on all nor should
one be critical at all times. [26]
