64                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

यदच्छया समापन्नो नियतायुयं । भिषण्मानी निजष्मभ्यो नरान् हन्त्यज्ञतायुषाम् ।।१७।।

Such one regarding himself as physician, cures by chance a diseased person
whose life-span is certain but, on the other hand, kills hundreds having uncertain life-
span. [17]

तस्माच्छास्त्रे बर्यैज्ञाने प्रवृत्तौ कर्मदर्शने । भिषजो चतुष्वे युक्तः; प्राणाभिस्र उच्यते ।।१८।।

Hence, a physician devoted to these four–scriptures, understanding, application
and practical experience is known as one who promotes life. [18]

हेतौ लिङ्गे प्रशमने रोगाणामपुनभर्वे । ज्ञानं चतुर्विधं यस्य स राजर्हो भिषक्तमः ।।१९।।

The physician who possesses knowledge of the four aspects–cause, symptoms,
cure and prevention of diseases, is the best one and is fit for a king. [19]

शस्तं शास्त्रान्ते सलिलं गुणदोषप्रवृत्तये । पात्रापेक्षीणां स्यात् प्रज्ञा चिकित्सायमं विशोधयेत् ।।२०।।

Weapon, scripture and water depend on their recepient for consequent merits
and demerits. So, (a physician) should purify his intellect for treatment (of patients). [20]

विद्या वितकैं विज्ञानं स्मृतिस्तत्परता क्रिया । यस्यैते षड्गुणास्तस्य न साध्यमतिवर्तते ।।२१।।
विद्या मतिः; कर्मदृष्टिरभ्यासः; सिद्धिराश्रयः: । वैद्ययाद्यैभिरष्वतम्वर्यभौकमान्यम् ।।२२।।
यस्य त्वेते गुणाः: सर्वे सन्ति विद्यादयः: शुभाः: । स वैद्यार्हा सहुभूतमर्मीय प्राणिसुखप्रदः ।।२३।।

Learning reasoning, specific knowledge, memory, devotion and action–one who
possesses these six qualities, nothing remains unachievable for him.

Learning, wisdom, practical knowledge, experience, accomplishment and popu-
larity–out of these even one quality is sufficient to give significance to the degree of
'Vaidya'. The one who possesses all the auspicious qualities like learning etc. de-
serves to hold the honourable degree of 'Vaidya' and showers happiness on the living
beings. [21-23]

शास्त्रं ज्योतिः: प्रकाशार्थं दर्शनं बुद्धिरात्मनः । ताम्यां भिषक् सुयुक्ताम्यां चिकित्सन्नापरारायति ।।२४।।
चिकित्सते यः: पादा: वम्मान्येनो्याप्रायाम्बोः । तस्मात् प्रयन्नमातिष्ठेदषि:, स्यमेवसम्पदि ।।२५।।

Scriptures are like light for illumination and own intellect is like eye, endowed
properly with both these factors, the physician while treating (a patient) does
not commit mistakes. Because in treatment, the (other) three legs are dependent
on the physician, hence the physician should make all efforts to enrich his qualities. [24-25]

मैत्री कारुण्यमातैषु शक्वये प्रीतिरुपेक्षणम् । प्रकृतिस्थेषु भूतेषु वैद्यवृत्तिश्चतुर्विधा ।।२६।। इति ।

Friendliness and compassion towards the diseased, interest in the amenable and
indifference to those who are moving towards end–this is the fourfold attitude of
physician. [26]
