66                                    CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                                    [CH

recover while others in similar conditions die. Thus therapeutic measures have practically no role. It is similar to a little water thrown in a ditch or a pond or a handful of dust scattered as a flowing river or a heap of dust. On the other hand, there are patients who, in spite of the lack of necessary materials, attendants, patience and expert medical service, recover, while others in similar condition die. As while being treated patient recovers and (in similar condition) other dies; and even while not being treated he recovers and (in similar condition) other dies. Hence it may be taken that therapeutics is not different from non-therapeutics. [4]

वैद्यः । मिथ्या विलपत इलाचेषः; किं कारणं, ये छातुराः षोडशभुणसंपदितेनाच्छ भेषजेनोपचर्यमाणा विप्रतिपद्यन्ते न ते भेषजानुपचर्यत; ये च षोडशगुणोपेतेन भेषजेनानुपचर्यमाणा अपि युज्यन्ते न ते समुपचर्यन्ते, न तेषां समुपचिकित्साया अयमुपालम्भारोष वचति; यस्तु पतितं पुरुषं साम्पराधिकेन प्रत्युत्थानाशक्तमप्युदथापयेत् स खल्वेव ज्ञेयः। स विज्ञाततत्त्वतत्त्वांगसम्यक्प्रयोगतोपचारो भेषजप्रयोगाद्युज्यते; स सद्भावश्च स च सर्व एवं स्थे भेषजस्थाने, समुपचितस्य, यदि सर्वे ब्याधयोऽभक्षन्ध्यसाध्याः, न ब्याध्यभक्तोऽव्याधितः शक्यन्ते; यद्यपीह स भेषजस्याभेषजकर्तृत्वं निर्दिश्यते; तद्यथा, वैद्येन परीक्ष्योपचर्यमाणस्य स दृष्टेष्टफलसिद्धिः, स शिल्पी चेत्कथमर्थस्वयं गृहीत्वा धनुराखाय अपरिचयदूरं महाबिम्बं उदाहृत्य अपेक्षितं फलं अधिगच्छेत्, एवमेव वैद्यः स्वगुणसंपन्नः सर्वोपकरणोपेतः परीक्ष्योपचर्यमाणस्य।
तथैव भेषजभेषजेऽभिसार्यते ॥ ४ ॥

Maitreya ! you think wrongly-said Ātreya. The argument is this-that patients inspite of having been treated with therapy equipped with sixteen qualities die is incorrect because therapy is never impotent in respect of curable diseases. However, the patients who recover without the entire therapy, in these cases too, it is not correct to say that administration of total therapy does not contribute to the recovery. For instance, when somebody helps a fallen person, even if he himself is able to get up, he stands up more quickly and easily. Likewise, the patients recover with administration of total therapy. In case of the patients who die even after the total therapy, they all are not liable to recovery after therapeutic administration because all deseases are not curable by therapeutic measures. On one side, there is no cure of curable diseases without applying therapeutic measures and, on the other side, the therapeutics has no role in case of incurable diseases, even a learned physician is not capable to arouse a dying patient. Hence the skillful people always act after careful examination (of the situation). As an archer having theoretical knowledge and practical experience in the art, does not fail when he takes the bow and strikes the arrow to a not distant and big object and thus achieves the desired result, likewise, the physician, endowed with his qualities and equipped with all necessary materials, proceeds with treatment (of the patient) after careful examination,
