X]                            SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   67

alleviates the curable disease without fail and provides normalcy to the patient.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that therapeutics is not different from non-thera-
peutics. [5]

इदं च न: प्रत्यक्षं–यदनातुरेण भेषजेनातुरं चिकित्समानं, क्षामनहाकीर्णं, कृशं च दुर्बलमान्वयायां: स्यूलं
मेदस्विनमावेलप्यं:, प्रतिलीनमारीनिमिदं: शीतामिग्नि दीप्तामिग्न कुर्वन्ति, न्यूनत् धातून् पूरयन्ति, व्यधिर्तिकारान्,
ह्रासयन्ति, व्याधीनू मूत्र्निन्हरामेव्यचत्सरस्तयः सम्यक् प्रकृतौ स्थापयन्त्नि; तैरैव नरलत्सा कुर्वनितमं भेषजसमुदायान्
भवति ।।६।।

This is also observed by us–that we treat a diseased person with disease-allevi-
ating therapy, the wasted with anti-wasting-therapy; we saturate the emaciated and
weak, dissaturate the plumpy and obese, we treat the one afflicted with heat with
cold therapy and that with cold with hot therapy, we compensate the depleted dhātus
and reduce the increased ones. Thus by treating the disorders with therapy which is
opposite to the causative factor we re-establish the normalcy well. Because of their
effective role in the aforesaid way, the therapeutic measures are valuable to us. [6]

भवन्ति चात्र–
साध्यासाध्यविभागज्ञो ज्ञानपूर्वं चिकित्सकः । ‌। कर्मयं चारभते कर्म यस्तु साधयति ध्रुवम् ।।७।।
अवद्भिद्यायोतर्गनुमुत्क्षातसंसर्व्यस्य । प्राज्ञत्यञिनाम्त वैद्यो योऽस्याच्चा समुपाचरेत् ।।८।।

Thus is said–

The physician, who knows the classification of curable and incurable suffering
and proceeds with treatment in time after thorough knowledge certainly succeeds.

On the other hand, the physician, treating an incurable disease certainly suffers
from the loss of wealth, learning and reputation and both censure and un-
popularity. [7-8]

सुखसाध्यं भवेत् साध्यं कृच्छृसाध्यमथापि वा । द्विविधं चाप्यसाध्यं स्याद्याप्यं यच्चानुपक्रमम् ।।९।।
साध्यानां त्रिविधाणामभत्योतुष्ठानदुकर्ता इति । बिकल्यो, न त्वसाध्यानां निर्देशात् विकल्पना ।।१०।।

Curable diseases are of two types–easily curable and hardly curable. In curable
ones are also of two grades–low, palliable and unmanageable. In curable diseases too there
are three grades–low, medium and high; but as regards incurable ones, there is no
any gradation. [9-10]

हेतवः पूर्वरूपाणि रूपाण्यथ्यनाप्ति यस्य च । न च तुल्यगुणो दूष्यो न दोषः प्रकृतिर्भवेत् ।।११।।
न च कालगुणस्तुल्यो न देशो दुखसहमः । गतिमंज्ञा नवलं वै रोगस्यैयोद्रस्य न च ।।१२।।
दोषहौकिः: समुप्तसो देहः: सर्वधिभक्षम: । चतुष्पादोपयसिद्धः सुखसाध्यस्य लक्षणम् ।।१३।।

Causes, prodromes and symptoms are a few; dūṣya is not similar to doṣa in
quality nor is doṣa as (dominant) in constitution, similarly of time is also not
similar, the place is not such where management is difficult, movement of the doṣa is
