68                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

origin of disorder is recent, absence of complications, involvement of one doṣa in
pathogenesis, body capable of tolerating all therapeutic measures and proper arrange-
ment of four legs (physician, drug, attendant and patient). This denotes the curable
disease. [11-13]

निविपर्यस्तमेतेषां स्यान्मध्यं बले । कालप्रकृतिदुर्व्याणां सामान्येऽन्यतमेऽन्वये च ।।१४।।
गर्भिणीवृद्धबालानां नानुचक्रयधिदिनान् । शक्यशस्त्रापरिप्रकेषच कृच्छ्रसाध्यत्वलश्यमम् ।।१५।।
विग्रादेक्षपदं रोगं नातिपूर्ण्ावपुनवद्यम् । द्विरयो नातिकालीचं वा कृच्छ्रसाभ्यं विद्दिष्याले ।।१६।।

In case of medium severeness (in curable), some of the prodromes and symptoms similarity of
one of time, constitution and dūṣya, the patient being a pregnant lady, old man and a
child, not afflicted with too many complications, having operation of surgical meas-
ures, alkali or fire, not recently developed, location in vital parts, involvement of one
passage but not equipped fully with four legs (of therapy), of two passages but not of
very long period and having causation by two doṣas, the disease should be taken as
hardly curable. [14-16]

शेषलचादुःप्रंघो स्थायभिचोपाधयेव । लक्ष्माल्थविप्लाजुर्णि्प्रथवा । नित्यानुर्णरोधम् रोगं दौर्चिकाल्पीहमिसर्वतत् ।।१७।।
गम्भीरं बहुधातुसगं मर्मणामधिष्ठानार्णाम् ता । नित्यानुशीतिने रोगे दौर्व्रतीनां दीर्घकालमनुवर्तन्ते ।।१८।।

The palliable disease, though incurable, does not cut the life-span and the patient
gets some relief by observing the wholesome routine, but the trouble aggravates shortly
even by the slight cause. Such disease is deep-seated, located in more than one dhātus,
affecting vital parts and joints, ever continuing for a long period and caused by two
doṣas. [17-18]

विद्यादेिद्रेयेन्द्रे, तद्रा अन्याद्येव विद्वज्ञं । क्रियाणामप्रतिक्रर्तू सर्वभावानुसारितम् ।।१९।।
औत्सुक्यारिंसगनोहकर्मिन्द्रियनाशनम् । दुर्बलस्य सुसंचद्ध व्याधिं सारिष्टमेव च ।।२०।।

Likewise, the rejactable (incurable) disease is caused by three doṣas, not amena-
ble to any therapy, involving all the passages, producing anxiety, uneasiness, and
disorders of consciousness, destroying the (function of) the sense organs, quite ad-
vanced, haing developed fatal signs particularly in weak patients. [19-20]

भिषजा प्राज्ञ्य परीक्ष्यैवं विकारागां स्वलक्षणम् । पक्षाक्षभेदसप्रायम्ः: कार्यः: साध्येयु चीमता ।।२१।।
साध्यासाध्यविभागात्त सम्यक्कुप्तिम्वेधं, न च सा मैत्रेयुवाद्यां मिथ्यादुद्धिं प्रकल्पयेत् ।।२२।।

Thus, a wise physician should first examine the specific characters of diseases
and then take up the treatment only in case of curable diseases. One who knows The
difference between curable and incurable diseases and takes action in right earnest is
not liable to produce wrong notions in persons like Maitreya. [21-22]

तत्र श्लोकाः–
हतोश्य पादगुणाः: प्रश्नो मेर्वजहाया । आत्रेयमैर्णेयमती महाचिद्रेण्वानंदधीनाम् ।।२३।।
