70                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

अथ द्वितीयं धनेषणामापदेत, श्रोत्व्यो ध्यानरन् धनमेव पर्येष्यं भवति; न ख्लु: धायात् पापीयोऽस्ति यदनुपकरणस्य दीर्घमायुः, तस्मादुपकरणानि प्रश्रे व्रतेत । तत्रोपकरणोपायानुपोत्थाख्यायाम्; तथा—कृषिपशुपाल्यवाणिज्यराजोपसेवादिनः यानि चान्यान्यपि सताविवर्जितानि कर्माणि वृत्तिसुखकराणि विद्यामानपारमर्थं जातु; तथा कुर्वन् दीर्घंजीवितं जीवेत्यनसूयवत्। पुरुषो भवति । इति द्वितीया धनेषणा व्याख्याता भवति ॥५॥

Hereafter, one desires for wealth. Next, it is wealth which is to be sought. There is nothing more sinful than to have a long life without means (of maintenance). Hence one should make effort to achieve these means, the methods for which are mentioned here such as—agriculture, animal husbandry, trade and commerce, government service etc. and other such works which are not discarded by noble persons and are promoters of livelihood—such works one should start doing. By working in this way one lives a long life without any dishonour. Thus the second desire for wealth is explained. [5]

अथ तृतीयं परलोकेषणामापदेत । संशयश्च, कच्चं ? भविष्याम इत्यत्र न वेति; कुतः पुनः संशय इति, उभयं—तानि द्रोकः प्रत्यक्षरूपः परोक्षश्च पुनर्जन्म च तत्रिक्तव्यभिचारिणः; इतिभेदाश्च—
'मातरं पितरं केचन मन्यन्ते जन्मकारणम् । स्वभावं परिणामं च स्रष्टारं धाम्नो जनाः ॥इति। अतः संशयः—किं नु खल्वस्ति पुनर्भवो न वेति ॥६॥

Now one should give up the third desire for the other world. Here is doubt, why ? because whether we shall be reborn after departing (from this world) or not. The background of such doubt is that some scholars devoted to perception only have accepted nihilism because rebirth is imperceptible while others hold rebirth only on evidence of scriptures. Then, there is also difference of opinion among the scriptures such as—

'Some consider parents as the cause of birth while others hold nature, creation by other (creator) and chance as the same'. Hence it is doubtful whether there is rebirth or not. [6]

तत्र बुद्धिमांस्तिस्रोऽप्यनुपादाय जवानुपात ? तत्स्यां स्रुखम्; अत्रत्यभावश्चापिरित, यदागमानुयुक्तिभिरमत्यते; शैरेय तात्विदिन्त्यैः प्रत्यक्षज्ञानलभ्यते, तान्येव सति धास्त्रव्यलभ्यते ॥७॥

And so give up nihilistic approach and also vacillation. Why ? because the scope of perception is very limited while that of the imperceptible is large which is known by scriptures, inference and reasoning. Moreover, the sense organs which are instruments of perception, are themselves imperceptible. [7]
