XI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   71

सतो न सन्यायगतिसौक्ष्म्यादिद्रियाविषयत्वदूर्वणात्, करणानविर्लय्यान्यनाकारणोद्यद्द्य सदानमिलभ्यादेश्वर्पन-
मौध्यान्य प्रत्यन्तुर्णवन्तीमागि; तस्मादप्रत्यक्षीभूत्तान्तुक्ष्यते–प्रत्यक्षनेवामि, नान्यद्तस्तीति ॥८॥

Even the existing forms can't be known by perception due to various factors
such as excessive nearness, too much distance, covering, inability of sense organs,
instability of mind, mixing up with similar objects, over-shadowing and excessive
minuteness. Hence it is illogical to say that only perception is there and nothing
else. [8]

बुतयश्चौता न कारणं, युक्तिविरोधात् ।
आत्मा मातुः; पितुस्तं यः: सोऽपत्येऽप्यच्धि संसरेत् । द्विविधौ संसरेद्भात्मा सर्वो वाऽययेयेन वा ।।९।।
सर्वश्चेत् संसरेन्मातुः: पितुर्वा मरणं भवेत् । निर्जर्वं, गापयवः: कांहुत्सुप्त्सेस्य चाप्नतः: ।।१०।।

The (divergent) scriptures too can not stand because of contradiction to reason-
ing. If the self of the parents migrates to the progeny, it may go either wholly or
partly. In case, it goes wholly, the parents should die invariably and as regards the
other alternative, there can not be any part of the subtle self. [9-10]

बुद्धिमेक्षश निमिर्णे यदैवात्मा तथैव ते । येषा व्वैवा मतिस्तेषा योनिर्जीयेत चतुर्विधा ।।११।।

As in case of self, decision may be taken in cases of intellect and mind too (of the
parents being responsible for birth). Moreover, in the opinion of people having such
view, there can not be fourfold categories of (moving ones). [11]

स्वधातुः: स्वमावकिथ षण्णां धातूनां यदा स्वलक्षणम् । संयोगे च वियोगे च तेषां कर्मैव कारणम् ।।१२।।

Though specific characters of the nature of six dhātus are there, their conjunc-
tion and disjunction (responsible for birth and death respectively) depend upon the
causation of action (of ātman). [12]

अनारंभोऽनवाच्छोध्लनं परिनिमिर्तिः । परं आत्मा स चेदेहुषष्तोऽस्ु परिनिर्मिर्तिः ।।१३।।

Creation of beginningless and nature of consciousness (self) by some other
(creator) does not look logical. If the word 'para' means 'ātman' himself then this may
be accepted as the cause (of creation). [13]

न परीक्षा न परीक्ष्यं न कर्ता कारणं न च । न देवा नर्षयः; सिद्धाः: कर्म कमर्फलं न च ।।१४।।
नाशितत्वमातिर त्यैव साध्वानुद्वसंहितत्वनम् । पातकेभयः; परं चैतच्छयादकं नार्कत्कृषात्-भं ।।१५।।

For the negativist whose consciousness has been injured by (accepting) the theory
of chance, there is no examination, one to be examined, doer, cause, saints, gods, sages,
accomplished persons, action, result of action and also the self. This holding up of
negativism is the worst among sinful. [14-15]

तस्मात्सति विमुख्वैलोमाग्रेः्यता सुधा: । सत्तं बुद्धिप्रदीपेन पश्येलसत्पर्यवस्थाम् ।।१६।।

Hence the learned should give up this view leading to bad path and should see all
in reality with the lamp of knowledge provided by noble persons. [16]
