XI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   75

त्रय उपस्तम्भा इति–आहार:, स्वप्नो, ब्रह्मचर्यमिति; एभिस्त्रिभिर्युक्तैरुपस्तब्धमुपस्तम्भैः शरीरं
बलवर्णोपचयोपचितमनुवर्तते यावदायुः:संस्काराद्, संस्कारमाहतायुरुसेवमानस्य, म इँईयेपदेशते ।।३५।।

There sub-pillars are–diet, sleep and celibacy, if these three are taken up
properly and thus the body is supported well by these pillars, it continues well
endowed with strength, complexion and development till the completion of lifespan
provided one abstains from harmful practices which will be explained here itself. [35]

त्रिविधं बलमिति–सहजं, कालजं, युक्तिकृतं च । सहजं यच्छरीरसत्वयोः; प्राकृतं, कालकृतमृतुविभागजं वयःकृतं
च, युक्तिकृतं पुनस्तद्यदाहारचेष्टायोगजम् ।।३६।।

Strength is of three types–congenital, time-effected and acquired. Congenital
is that which is natural to the body and mind; time-effected is due to seasonal varia-
tions and age factor. Acquired one is produced by proper application of diet and
exercise. [36]

त्रीण्यायतनानीति–अथर्या कर्माणः, कालात्व चातिगर्गोगायोगमिथ्यायोगाः । । तन्नातिप्रभावत्तव् दुश्यमानातिमात्रं
दशेनमतियोगः, सर्वर्शाऽदशेनमयोगः; अतितिक्षकतिदियच्छरूविद्रौ्द्धयुत्तस्त्राव्य्याग्तस्त्रीगळुदूस्रात्मरसत्ज्चादिनाग-
दशेन मिथ्यायोगः; तथातिशिमनादलतितत्ववद्दीनांमौ लामध्ववसिस्वरायं, कस्वमीडिचर्वपपर्गेर्भो भादुतैमादाज्वान्रलयर, लद्धार्तायोगो:,
पुष्णुर्विणतो मिथ्यायोगो; तथाऽतिगिमर्विनिङ्शुकवयः अवयशम्बेथवरमधौगयो, मिध्यायोगः, तथातितीतौष्वोशीयायिगुरुकेकटुकसायणूक्वोप्णायोगो
प्राणायोगः; सर्वश्रोऽनादयानयीगणे, मिष्यायागो राशिवाक्षेर्बाहरनरिविभविधगरीवारैन्वेमुपसेवते;
तथा त्रिशीतोष्याम्न स्पृश्यानां स्नानाब्भ्याद्रक्यसादार्गी बालनुम्सस्वसमगतिर्यात्ा; सबंशाऽनुपसेवनमोः; स्नानादीनां
शीतोष्णादीनां च स्पृश्यानामन्तानुष्ष्ठीपसेवनं विवरसगरियाननातिकतौशु्यभूतार्सम्पादुद्भाेति मिथ्यायोगः: ।।३७।।

There are three causes of (disorders)–excessive, negative and perverted uses
of sense-objects, actions and time. Such as–excessive gazing at the overbrilliant
object is excessive use, avoiding looking altogether is negative use and seeing too
near, too distant, fierce, frightful, wonderful, disliked, disgusting, deformed and
terrifying objects is perverted use of visual objects. Likewise, to hear too much the
loud sound of clouds, drums, cries etc. is excessive use; not at all hearing is negative
use and hearing of harsh and frightful words and those which indicate death of
dear ones, loss, humiliation etc. is perverted use of auditory objects. Too much
smelling of too sharp, intense and congestant odors is excessive use, not at all
smelling is negative use and smelling of foetid, disliked, impure, decomposed, poi-
soned air, cadaveraceous odour etc. is perverted use of olfactory objects. Likewise,
too much intake of rasas (tastes) is excessive use, not at all taking is negative use of
gustatory objects. Perverted use of those will be described in the chapter dealing with
