76                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

the methods of eating except the quantity. Too much indulgence in very hot and
very cool objects and also in bath, massage, anointing etc. is excessive use of tactile
objects; total abstinence from them is negative use and application of tactile objects
such as hot and cold bath etc. without the usual order and also the touch of uneven
surface, injury, dirty objects, organisms etc. is perverted use of tactile object. [37]

तदैकं स्पर्शनेन्द्रियाणामिन्द्रियव्यापकं चेतः समनाधि, स्पर्शनव्याधीव्यापिकमधि च चेतः; हस्मात् सर्वेन्द्रियाणां
व्यापकस्पर्शेङ्गतो यो भावविशेषः; संयोग्यमृत्यपायत्वं यद्विभिन्नविभिन्नविकल्पनो भवत्यसात्म्येन्द्रियार्थसंयोगः; सात्म्यानि
हुयन्याचारः; ।।३८।।

Out of all the senses, the tactile sense alone pervades all the sense organs and is
also associated inherently with mind so due to pervading of tactile sense, mind also
pervades. Thus the condition of all the sense organs produced by the overall tactile
sensation, because of being harmful, is known as unwholesome conjunction of sense
organs and its objects which is of five types each having three sub-divisions. The
objects which are accepted suitably are known as wholesome ones. [38]

कर्म वाग्मनःशरीरयुक्तं; । तत् वाग्मनःशरीराणिप्रवर्तितेयोगाः; सर्वांशेऽप्रवृत्तिरयोगः; वेगमाधारणोदीरणविधि-
मखल्वनप्रतनुप्रगतिभ्रामणगृत्रूणहारप्राणावरोधपरपीड़ासंलेशनादिः; वारिरो मिथ्यायोगः; धृत्वकालानृतभणहारिप्रि-
बद्धनुप्रकाश्यवचनाविदित्रिद्ध्यधायोगः; म्यापेतिकलोभशोभशोग्ममतिद्रमतिदानिष्मांनसेो मिथ्यायोगः; ।।३९।।

Action is application of speech, mind and body. Too much application of these
is excessive use and their total non-application is negative use. Holding up or forcing
of urges, sleeping, falling and posturing on uneven places, abnormal posturing,
heating, pressing, obstructing breath and torturing is the perverted use of bodily
actions, words indicating betrayal, lying, untimely speech, quarrel, unliking,
irrelevance, indiscipline and harshness etc. come under the perverted uses of speech;
fear, grief, anger, greed, confusion, conceit, envy, wrong knowledge is the perverted
use of mind. [39]

संक्षेपं चातिमिथ्यायोगयोगं कर्म वाग्मनःशरीरजमुक्तमतिप्रवृत्ति सततस्य मिथ्यायोगं विद्यात् ।।४०।।

In short, the harmful action of speech, mind and body which remain unsaid
except excessive and negative uses be taken as their perverted use. [40]

इदि त्रिविधविकल्पं कर्म त्रिप्रधायत्वं इदि भव्यमस्ते ।।४१।।

This threefold action each having three subdivisions is taken as prajñāparādha
(intellectual error). [41]

शीतोष्णाभवलक्षणाः पुनर्भेदाप्रीमर्थाः; संस्कार; स कालः; । त्रात्तिमात्रस्थलक्षणाः कालः कालातितोयोगः;
हीनसलक्षणाः (कालः) कालायोगः; वचावलक्षणमिपरीतलक्षणान्तु (कालः)कालमिथ्यायोगः। कालः पुनः
परिणाम उच्यते ।।४२।।
