78                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

The therapy of psychic disorders is properly following the three categories (virtue, wealth and enjoyment), company of experts and alround specific knowledge of self etc. [47]

अथ रोगमार्ग इति—शाखा, मर्माणिस्वयन्धयः, कोष्ठ। तत्र शाखा रक्तादयो धातवस्त्वक् च, बाह्यो रोगमार्गः; मर्माणि युतन्तिशिरदयुमुतींनि, अभिसरमार्गोऽस्थिसन्धियोगस्त्रोयोनिमार्गश्च स्नायुकण्डराः; स मध्यमो रोगमार्गः; कोष्ठः पुरस्त्वये महाशेतः; शरीरस्यार्धं यावाग्रिमागपाकादाभ्येति पर्यायमिशलेते; स रोगमार्ग आभ्यन्तरः ।।४८।।

There are three passages of diseases–periphery, vital parts alongwith bonejoints and belly. Periphery consists of dhātus–blood etc. and twak (skin including rasa dhātu located in that). This is the external passage of disease. Vital parts are urinary bladder, heart, head etc., bone-joints are those where bones meet alongwith the bound ligaments and tendons–this is the middle passage of diseases. Belly is commonly known as the great channel in the middle of the body extending from above downwards including āmāśaya (stomach) and pakwāśaya (intestines). This passage of disease is the internal one. [48]

तत्र, गण्डविकाताग्वज्ञचर्मकीलालियोनमसकुष्ठालाद्यादयो विकारा बाहिर्मार्गाणां विसर्पवायुगुल्मशोथविकाराः; शाखानुसारिणो मभति रोगाः; पक्षवधधतपारककुटिलयोगमावशकुञ्चनमुखवक्रग्रहाः; शिरोरोगेशिरोतीरमार्गेशया मध्यमार्गानुसारिणो मभति रोगाः; जनरातिसारछर्दिरलसकाजीर्णशूलशोथक्षिकाहिक्काइयसोऽजीर्णातिसारो विसर्पग्रहवायुगुल्माशोथविकाराः; कोष्ठानुसारिणो भवति रोगाः ।।४९।।

There, diseases like glands, boils, diabetic boils, scrofula, wart, granuloma, moles, leprosy and other skin diseases freckles etc. and erysipelas, oedema, gaseous tumour, piles and abscess etc. occurring in the external passage are the diseases following the (passage of) periphery. Hemiplegia, stiffness of sides, convulsion, facial paralysis, wasting, tuberculosis, pain in bone-joints, prolapse of rectum etc. and also the diseases of head, heart and urinary bladder are the diseases following the middle passage. Diarrhoea, vomiting, alasaka, fever, cholera, cough, dyspnoea, hiccup, hardness of bowels, abdominal enlargement, spleen enlargement etc. along with erysipelas, oedema, gaseous tumour, piles, abscess etc. occurring in internal passage are the diseases which follow the (passage of) belly. [49]

त्रिविधा भिषज इति—
भिषक्छद्मचरः सानि यत्नेकेषे सिद्धसारिताः। सानि वैद्यगुणेयुक्ताभिविधा भिषजो भूमि ।।५०।।
वैद्यमाण्डीपेः पुतैः प्रत्यवैद्यबालोनेः। लक्षणे ते भिषक्शब्दमहाशले तत्सिरेपक्षः ।।५१।।
श्रीयशोभिनसिद्धाना कार्यमानानां दयाभवः। वैद्यशब्दे संभवे ये श्रेयांसे लक्षसारिताः ।।५२।।
प्रयोगशानविज्ञानेनिदर्शः; सुखदाः। श्रीभागिमसरारेव सुयेवोना वेयादितादिविधि ।।५३।।

There are three kinds of physicians–fraudulent, those imitating the accomplished ones and other endowed with physician's qualities. Those who by virtue of having
