XI]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   79

some instruments with medicines, models (and charts), useless speech and look use
the title of 'physician' are fools and fake ones. Those who practise in the name of
physicians accomplished in wealth, fame and knowledge, and, though not similar to
them are the physicians imitating the accomplished ones. Those who are accomplished
in rational administration, knowledge, specific knowledge and success, and who pro-
vide happiness and promote life are the real physicians in which qualities of physi-
cians are found. [50-53]

त्रिविधमौषधमिति–दैवव्यपाश्रयं, युक्तिव्यपाश्रयं, सत्त्वावजयश्च । तत्र दैवव्यपाश्रयं–मन्त्रौषधिमणिमंगल-
होमनियमप्रायश्चिप्तोपवासस्वस्त्ययनप्रणिपातगमनादि, युक्तिव्यपाश्रयं–पुनराहारौषधद्रव्याणां योजना, सत्त्ववजयः:-
पुनरहितेभ्यो अर्थेभ्यो मनोनिग्रह: ।।५४।।

There are three types of therapy–spiritual, rational and psychological. The spir-
itual therapy consists of recitation of mantras, wearing roots and gems, auspicious
acts, offerings, gifts, oblations, following religious precepts, atonement, fasting, in-
voking blessings, falling on (the feet of) the gods, pilgrimage etc. The rational therapy
consists of rational administration of diet and drugs. Psychological therapy is restraint
of mind from the unwholesome objects. [54]

शरीरदोषप्रकोपे तु खल्वौदयं सायर्यं, युक्तिव्यापाश्रयमेव भिषक्तर्मा–अन्तः:परिमार्जनं, बहिः:परिमार्जनं, शस्त्रप्रणिधानं
चेति । तत्रान्त:परिमार्जनं यच्छरीरमनुप्रविश्यभुक्तमन्नव्यापदमपहत्य प्रकृतिमापादयति, बहिः:परिमार्जनं पुनरभ्यंङ्गस्वेदप्रदेहप्रिरिसेकोन्मर्दनाविसेशणा;
शस्त्रप्रणिधानं पुनश्छेदनमेदनमध्यानन्तेष्णांलिस्तोमुबहुनिस्नवणपीडविविधान्विजिर्जिरेश
तत्राजकोपदीसधं मार्गणण्बरदिभेशरसायनमय्यदिन्दिरव्यपसंपन्वदायितकोष्णं । तर्च युक्तिर्णाहर्गेनामें । मुकुत्रगितेध्यायेति ।।५५।।

In case of vitiation of bodily doṣas, three types of therapy are administered in
relation to the body–they are : internal cleansing, external cleansing and surgical
operation. Internal cleansing means the therapy which, entering into the body inside,
alleviates the disorders caused by diet. The therapy which by external contact through
massage, fomentation, pasting, sprinkling, pressing etc. removes the disorders.
Surgical operation consists of excision, incision, puncturing, rupturing, scraping,
extraction, scarifying, probing and (application of) alkli and leeches. [55]

भवति चात्र–
प्राज्ञो रोगे समुत्पन्ने बाह्योऽभ्यन्तरेण वा । कर्मणा लभते शर्मं शर्माकाडक्षिणमवा ।।५६।।
बालच्वलुखलु मोहाह्च प्रमादाच्च न बुध्यते । उपयच्यमानं प्रथमं रोगं शुष्मवियाहुधा ।।५७।।
अनुपयं बलिनं रोगं पूर्वा रोगः: परिगद्यं च हक्ष्यौ । स बहुत्कटस्य यथिचारेत् सुखम पर्मेश्मसगमेक्तरमेष ।।५८।।
न मूढो लभते संज्ञां तावद् यावन्न पीष्यते । सर्वाभ्यागि मे कष्टं: संक्षिप्तस्यानोरतिप्रसंगः । ।।५९।।
तथा न वे कः: शक्तो दुर्बले व्याधिमोजिस्त्रम् । कृरणं क्षीणोरिनयो दीने परिक्रातुं गलायुषम् ।।६०।।
