XIII]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                87

Ghee, oil, fat and marrow–these are regarded as the best ones among all the
uncting substances. Among them too, ghee is the best one because of the continuance
of (the properties of) processing. [13]

घृतं पित्तास्त्रिवारं रसायुक्तौजसां हितम् । निर्याणेन मृदुकरं स्वरवर्णांसाधनम् ।।१४।।

Ghee alleviates pitta and vāta, is beneficial for rasa, semen and ojas, cooling
softening and improves voice and complexion. [14]

मारुतान्नं च श्लेष्मवर्धनं बलवर्धनम् । त्वग्व्रणां विवारकारं शैलं योनिविशोधनम् ।।१५।।

Oil alleviates vāta but, at the same time, does not aggravate kapha. It promotes
strength, is beneficial for skin, hot, provides firmness and cleans female genital pas-
sage. [15]

विद्धभ्राशतप्रद्योतिकाणिहिरोहेषि । पौरुषोपचये स्नेहे व्यायामे चेष्टते वसा ।।१६।।

Muscle-fat is used in perforation, fracture, injury, prolapse of uterus, ear-ache,
and headache. It is also useful for enhancing virility, unction and for those who prac-
tice physical exercise. [16]

बलशूकरकास्लेष्ममेदोमज्जास्थिवर्धनम् । मज्जा विशेषतोऽस्थ्नां च बलकृत् स्नेहने हितः ।।१७।।

Marrow promotes strength, semen, rasa, kapha, meda (fat) and majjā (marrow).
It is particularly strength-giving to bones and is useful for unction. [17]

सर्पिः शरदि पातव्यं वसा जा च माघके । तैलं प्राग्रि नादुमाशाते स्नेहे पिबेत्तः ।।१८।।

Ghee should be taken in autumn, fat and marrow in spring and oil in early rains.
One should not take uncting substance in weather too hot or too cold. [18]

वातपित्तांशिको रात्रावुण्ये वापि पिबेत्तः । श्लेष्माधिको दिवा शीते विषमेऽवामनभाष्करे ।।१९।।

One, having aggravation of vāta and pitta also in summer, should take unc-
tion in night. That with aggravated kapha and in winter should take it in day when the
sun is clear. [19]

अत्युष्णे वा दिवा पीतो वातपित्तांधिकस्य वा । मूर्छा पिपासामन्याद् कामलां वा समीरयेत् ।।२०।।
शीते राखा पिखन् दूनेते नः श्लेष्माधिकस्येव वा । आनाहमनिको गुल्मे शूलं पादक वा सङ्करते ।।२१।।

(If this instruction is not followed and) one, having aggravation of vāta and, pitta
or in very hot season, takes unction in day, he becomes afflicted with fainting thirst,
insanity or jaundice. Similarly, if the person having dominant kapha or in cold season
takes it in night, he gets hardness of bowels, colic pain or anaemia. [20-21]

जलमुण्ये धूये चेष्ये मूषलीलेन्तु शास्त्रते । वसाामज्जीत्तु मञ्चः स्वाद् सर्वेणाण्यवचाम् वा ।।२२।।

After taking ghee one should drink hot water; maṇḍa (boiled rice water) after
soup after oil, maṇḍa (boiled rice water) after fat and marrow or in all cases hot
water. [22]

ओदनञ्च तिलपेयी च रसो मांसं पयो दधि । पचागुः सूपशाकी च यूः काम्बलिकः खदः ।।२३।।
