90                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

दीप्ताग्नयः क्लेशसहाः धमयाः: स्नेहसेविनः । वातातां: कुरुकोष्ठाश्च स्नेहान् मज्जानयापात्तुयु: ।।५०।।
पेय्यो ये भ्यो हितो यो यः: स्नेहः: स परिकीर्तितः ।

When the persons to be uncted are those having good appetite, tolerance and
gluttony, using unction habitually, afflicted with vāta, with hard bowels should take
marrow. Thus the uncting substances have been described according to their suitabil-
ity in different cases. [50]

स्नेहस्य प्रकर्षो तु सप्तरात्रिरात्रकम् ।।५१।।

The maximum and minimum time-limit for unction is seven and three nights re-
spectively. [51]

स्नेद्ध्यः: शोध्यवित्तेव्याद्याः रुक्षा वातविकारिणः । व्यायाममद्यस्त्रीनित्याः: स्नेद्ध्यः; स्युर्ये च चिन्तकाः: ।।५२।।

Those to be fomented and evacuated, who are rough, having vātika disorders,
indulge in physical exercise, wine and women and also engaged in mental work are
the persons to be uncted. [52]

संशोध्यमानूते येषां रूक्षणां संग्रह्थयते । न तेषां स्नेहने प्रशस्तुश्लक्ष्मामेदसम् ।।५३।।
अभिष्यन्नानानूगेरुऽ नित्यमद्यत्ब्द्धा वे । दूष्म्ायुष्करितसा गर्भिण्यवस्त्तायुगिणि: ।।५४।।
अब्द्विप्रदुर्दर्थनारे जठरामसद्दिराः: । दुर्बलाश्च प्रस्तानांता स्नेहल्वासम् मद्ात्ुुा: ।।५५।।
न स्नेद्धा वर्तमानेश्षु न नस्तोबस्तिकर्मसु । स्नेहयानत्तेषु प्रजायन्ते तेषां रोगाः: सुदा्चयाः ।।५६।।

Unction is not recommended for those who require roughening therapy (except
in case of evacuation), have excess of kapha and meda, with mouth and anus having
excessive secretions, have slow digestion, are afflicted with thirst and fainting, are
pregnant, have dry palate, aversion to food, vomiting, one afflicted with abdominal
enlargement, āma and poison, are weak in body and mind, depressed with unction, are
under narcosis, should not be uncted and also during administration of snuff and en-
ema because by taking unction, they become victims of severe disorders. [53-56]

पुरीषं भविदं रूक्षं वायुग्रमृणो मुहुः । पक्षा खरत्वं रौक्षं च गाव्रस्यानिनगणसकम् ।।५७।।

Nodulous and rough stool, unfavourable vāyu, milk digestion, coarseness and
roughness of body parts–these are the signs of uncted. [57]

वातानुलोम्यं दीपतोऽग्निवैर्च्य: स्निग्धमस्द्वतम् । मार्दवं स्निग्धता चाङ्गे स्निग्धानुपजायते ।।५८।।

Carmination, stimulated digestion, unctuous and unformed stool, softness and
unctuousness in body parts–these signs are observed in those who are properly
uncted. [58]

पाण्डुता गौरवं जाडघं पुरीवल्यविष्ठलाम् । तद्धिरुचिरुसक्शे:। स्यादतिस्निग्धलक्षणम् ।।५९।।

Paleness, heaviness, feeling of cold, undigested stool, drowsiness, anorexia and
nausea–these are signs of over-uncted. [59]
