92                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

तमाप्युल्लेखनं शरने स्नेदः कालञ्चशीक्षणम् । प्राति प्रति क्वथियत्वा वुद्ध्या संसर्पदेश च ॥७०॥
तत्कारिरप्योगङ्ख ऋक्षणानात्संसेव्यम् । यूगणौ त्रिफलायाश्च स्नेहव्यापित्भोजनम् ॥७१॥

In persons with intestines having excessive pitta and strong digestive power, the
uncting substance taken is reduced to ashes in a very short time by the power of dig-
estive fire. The fire fanned by unction and being powerful having consumed the
dose of the unction, affects the ojas and gives rise to complicated thirst. Even much
heavy food is not able to pacify the fire (fuelled and) intensified with unction. If the
person does not get cold water, he is burnt like a serpent lying within a room by his
own poison-fire.

If there arises thirst on indigestion of the unction, the physician should induce
vomiting. Again the patient should drink cold water and rough food and then vomit.
Ghee alone should not be taken in (excess of) pitta particularly associated with āma
because it produces colour (jaundice) in the whole body and having destroyed con-
sciousness kills (the patient).

Drowsiness, nausea, hardness of bowels, fever, stiffness, loss of consciousness,
skin disorders, itching, paleness, oedema, piles, anorexia, thirst, abdominal enlarge-
ment, disorders of grahaṇī, feeling of cold, obstruction in voice, colic pain and disor-
ders of āma—these arise due to improper unction.

These, frequent vomiting, fomentation, watching for a while and purgation are
recommended according to severity of disease. The use of buttermilk, ariṣṭa (a fer-
mented preparation) rough food and drinks, urines and three fruits is the remedy for
complications due to unction (or hyperlipidaemia). [70-78]

अकाले विहितैर्हि मात्रया न च योजिते । स्नेहे निरूपयोग्यारच स्याप्रत्येतितिसिवः ॥७९॥

Unction, if administered untimely, in unsuitable form, in improper or excessive
doses and with improper management may create complications. [79]

स्नेहात् प्रत्रकार्यं अनुविरेचोपरः पिबेद् । स्नेहद्वहयुगपुत् च अर्थ मृक्तला रसीदनम् ॥८०॥

Purgative should be administered three days after unction–during this interval,
the patient should take unctuous liquid and hot cooked rice with meat soup. [80]

एकाहोपरातद्वह्मला प्रत्र्दनि पिबेद् । स्मायत्सनो्यमायाहि धुरिः त्रेद विरेचनम् ॥८१॥

Emetic should be administered after one day's interval with the similar food.
The management in case of non-evacuative unction should be like that in
purgative. [81]

स्नेहिद्युः स्नेहिना मुखकोधाङ्ग धेयः । स्रलोशेणाच मद्यनियात्योपधिनिध विचारणम् ॥८२॥
लाचलीतिपश्रहान्यांपतिस्रकोव्रमुडाः राताः रत्नु स्नेहः हित्वा ॥८३॥
यत्कोलकुलत्थाङ्ग स्नेहः समुचेकंरः । दाडिम दधि सम्य रंसयोगसंगमे ॥८४॥
