XIII]                          SUTRASTHĀNA                               93

स्नेहचिन्ति तिलाः पूर्व जग्धाः सर्नेहपकाशिनाः । कृशराश बहुस्नेहासिलकाम्लिकासत्त्वा ।।६५।।
फाणितं मधुवेरं च तैलं च सुरया रसः । पिण्डखू पूर्वीसींसीतींड श्रीचाध्यं भोजनम् ।।६६।।
तैलं सुराया मधेनं वरुषां मञ्जानमेव वा । पिबमू सकधीतिस और नरः निष्ठित तातिकः ।।६७।।
धारोद्या स्नेहयुक्तं पीत्वा सशर्करं पयः । नरः निर्घृति पीत्वा वा तरं दमः सफाणितम् ।।६८।।
पाञ्चप्रसृतिकी पेया पायसो माषमिश्रितः । क्षीरितसो बहुस्नेहः स्नेहयेदविचारितः ।।६९।।
सर्पितेलसवासनगं तपकुलस्तुटिः म्रु(कृ)या । पाञ्चप्रसृतिकी पेया पेया स्नेहनिश्चिघ्नता ।।७०।।
(क्षीरसर्षि वा रसः निनघः सर्पितेलसणार्सुनाः । पीती द्विर्वारि चलत्वा स्नेहयेदविचारितम् ।।७१।।)

In case of those having aversion to uncting substance, habit of unction, soft
bowels, intolerance for physical strain and habit of drinking, uncting media are rec-
ommended.

The meat soup of common-quail, black partridge, peacock, swan, pig, cock,
cow, goat, wild sheep and fish are useful in unction. Barley, jujube, kulattha (horse
gram), uncting substances mixed with jaggery and sugar, pomegranates, curd and
the three pungent (long pepper, ginger and black pepper)–these are combined with
the above soup. The sesamum seeds if taken alongwith the uncting substance and
phānita (a sort of jaggery) before meals produce good unction. Similar is the effect
of krsarā (a dietary preparation of rice and pulse) with plenty of uncting substance
and of tilakāmbalika (a dietary preparation).

One, who is affected with roughness, should take phānita (a sort of jaggery),
ginger and oil together with wine. After it is digested he should take meal alongwith
minced meat. The person having predominance of vāta is uncted by taking oil, fat or
marrow alongwith clear wine or milk mixed with phānita (a sort of jaggery). A person
is uncted by taking fresh warm milk mixed with the uncting substance and sugar or
the upper fatty layer of curd together with phānita. The liquid gruel known
as pañcaprasṛtikī and pāyasa (rice cooked with milk) mixed with black gram, cooked
in milk and added with plenty of the uncting substance uncts the person in a
short time. Pañcaprasṛtikī gruel is prepared from five items (ghee, oil, fat, marrow
and rice) each in prasṛta (80 gm.) quantity. This gruel should be taken by one desiring
unction. [82-90]

(The soup of pork added with the uncting substance, ghee and salt uncts a person
in no time when taken twice a day (1).)

धाम्यानुपौदकं मांसं गुढे दधि पयसिमितलाः । कुली गोशी प्रमेधी च स्नेहेने न प्रयोजयेत् ।।९२।।
स्नेहेयिंबाये तान् सिद्धी स्नेहयेधविचारितिधः । धिप्पलीभिर्घीरितरेण सिद्धिभिफलामेयाधि वा ।।९३।।
ब्राक्षणलाघुपुष्भाये दर्मा पायसेन भाषणैः । प्वामिसर्षि मिथेय स्नेहं स्नेहं पीत्वा सिद्धेन्द्रिये ।।९४।।
वचकोलाकुलत्थादयो रतः अ्वरः सुरा दधि । क्षीरसर्पिसं तत् सिद्धं स्नेहेन्द्रिये पृतोदनम् ।।९५।।
