94                                    CARAKA-SAMHITĀ

    One suffering from leprosy, oedema and prameha should not use meat of do-
mestic, marshy and aquatic animals, jaggery, curd, milk and sesamum seeds. They,
according to their condition, should be uncted with the innocuous uncting substances
cooked with long pepper, harītakī or three fruits or with soup of grapes and āmalaka
and sour curd. The uncting substance cooked with the three purgents may also be
administered as intake for unction. Decoction of barley, jujube, kulattha, alkali, wine,
curd, ghee extracted from milk–all these cooked together make an excellent uncting
ghee. [91-94]

तैलमग्रवासासधिर्वद्रतिफलग्रारैः । योनिशुक्रद्रवेषु साध्यमिला प्रयोजयेत् ।।९५।।

    In disorders of female genital tract and semen; oil, marrow, fat, ghee cooked
alongwith decoction of jujube and three fruits may be used. [95]

गृहुत्यम्बु यथा यवः प्रव्रत्यधिकं यथा । यत्पाधि जीर्णी स्नेहतमा सर्वति वाचिक: ।।९६।।
यथा वाऽश्मेषु पृष्ठ्योद्गतसिंह वारि जलात् । सर्वति स्नेहतरोऽप्येवं स्त्रविताय स्फ्टितनिवः ।।९७।।

    As a cloth absorbs water and releases the excess, the uncting substance is as-
similated according to digestive power and the excess is thrown out. But when the
uncting substance is taken at once (without sufficient interval) it goes out entirely
(without effecting the body) like water poured over an earthen mass quickly flows
out without moistening it. [96-97]

लवणोपहितः स्नेहः स्नेहनत्विचारकरम् । तत्कभिपच्यद्रवत्वं च सूक्ष्मतेष्णं व्याधि च ।।९८।।

    The uncting substances added with salt unct the person in no time because the
salt is fluid-absorbing, non-rough, piercing, hot and is quickly absorbed. [98]

स्नेहमेद प्रयुज्ञीत ततः स्वेदनकुर्यात् । स्नेहस्वेदोपयोगान्ते संशोधनमवेदयेत् ।।९९।।

    First of all unction and then fomentation should be used. After having passed
through both these measures, one should be given either of the evacuatives–purgative
or emetic. [99]

तत श्लोकाः–
स्नेहाः स्नेहविधिः कुलत्थापातिलिधिः समेपणा । यथावारं भगवता स्याहतां वात्रभागिना ।।१०0।।

Now (the summing up) verses–
    The uncting substance, method of unction, management of its complications
alongwith medicament–these have been explained by the son of Candrabhāga (Atri)
according to the questions (raised). [100]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने स्नेहाध्यायो
नाम त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः ।।१३।।

    Thus ends the thirteenth chapter in Ślokasthāna in the treatise
composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka (13).

                                        •
