96                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

During fomentation, the eyes should be covered with clean cloth or circular pieces of moistened wheat flour or flowers of lotus, water lily and palāśa (silk cotton). Similarly, the cordial region of the person subjected to fomentation should be touched with cool pearl necklaces, cool utensils, lotus flowers or hand wet with water. [11-12]

शीतेषुशल्यरणे स्तम्भगौरवस्वेदहे । मृङ्कूषे माहिदे स्वेदे स्वेदयुक्तिरितिष्मिता ।।१३।।

Fomentation should be stopped when cold and pain subsides, stiffness and heaviness are controlled, softness and sweating produced. [13]

दितकर्मणो मूर्छा च धरतिस्तमां तृष्णा । दाहः स्वराङ्गदीनत्वमतिस्निग्धस्य लक्षणम् ।।१४।।
उक्तलस्यातिस्निग्धस्य यो विधिः कार्यो विधिः । सोऽतिविरिक्तस्य वार्षिकी मधुरः तिक्तषीतलः ।।१५।।

Vitiation of pitta, fainting, malaise, thirst, burning sensation, weakness of voice and organs–these are the symptoms of over-fomentation. In such cases, the regimen prescribed for the summer season in the chapter of 'his diet etc.' particularly sweet, unctuous and cold should be followed. [14-15]

काभ्यध्वादिलाणां गर्भिणी रक्तपित्तिनाम् । पित्रिणां सारिसारणां कृशाणां मद्यमेहिनाम् ।।१६।।
विदग्धमद्धिकानाम् विषयद्धिकाविरताम् । श्रान्तानां नवज्वरेश्नां स्थूलानां पित्तमेहिनाम् ।।१७।।
तृषाताँ बुभुत्सितानां च मुद्वाखानामपि शोच्यतः । काचलनुदिरापीत्य च क्षतान्नक्षयकृशैरपिणाम् ।।१८।।
दुर्बलातिक्षयोजसाम् तिमिरीणां च ।। विषमः तैमिरिकाणां च न स्वेद्यमाचरेत् ।।१९।।

Fomentation should not be applied to those who are habitual users of medicinal extracts and wine, in pregnant ladies, those afflicted with internal haemorrhage, pitta and diarrhoea, rough persons, diabetics, in those having burns, prolapse and bradhna (inguinal hernia), having complications of poison and alcohol, in fatigued, unconscious, plumpy, patients of pittaja meha, thirsty, hungry, angry and aggrieved ones, in those suffering from jaundice, abdominal enlargement, injury and ādhyaroga (vātarakta), in weak, emaciated and those having diminished ojas and suffering from timira (blurred vision). [16-19]

प्रतिश्याये च कासे च खिङ्गश्वासयतापयोः । कर्णमन्याशिरःशूले स्वरभेदे गलग्रहे ।।२०।।
अर्दितकाचकर्षाङ्गरोगेषु विचालयेत् । कोष्ठाग्निविबन्धेषु मूत्रकृच्छे विश्वम्भके ।।२१।।
पर्शुपृष्ठकटिबाहुषु मुद्रागातृ च मुद्रगुष्ठे वा मुष्कवृद्धिरदृश्यदृक् ।।२२।।
पादजानुजङ्घातिस्तम्भे कष्टाधिकानाम् शीले च स्वेद्याः ।।२३।।
संकोचायामगुरुत्वे स्तम्भगौरवे । स्वदशेषु विकारेषु स्वेद्यं स्विन्नान्त विश्वयम् ।।२४।।

Coryza, cough, hiccup, dyspnoea, non-lightness, pain in ear, backneck and head, hoarseness of voice, choaked throat, paralysis of face, one limb, whole or half body, bending of body, hardness of bowels and constipation, suppression of urine, excessive yawning, stiffness in sides, back, waist and abdomen, sciatica, dysuria, enlargement of scrotum, body-ache, pain and stiffness in feet, knees, thighs
