XIV]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    97

and shanks; swelling, khalī (contracture); conditions of āma, cold, shivering,
vātakaṇṭaka; contraction, extension, pain, stiffness, heaviness and numbness in
organs and general disorders–in these conditions fomentation is beneficial. [20-24]

तिलमाषकुलत्थाम्लपृथुतिलमिषदैः । यावसैः कृशरायाः पिण्डस्वेदे प्रयोजयेत् ।।२४।।
गोशकुनिबरासशकृत्कुलैः स्वेदयेत् । तिलकाशायतिलमाषककाऱ्यिकामांसयोगैः ।।२५।।
शलिशाकाः स्वेदस्ते पृथ्वीशिकाया समयान्तरे । इक्ष्वाणपंसाले शस्त्राणे यथायाः प्रतिस्थाने ।।२७।।

Piṇḍasveda (bolus fomentation) should be applied with sesamum, blackgram,
horse gram, sour preparations (vinegar etc.), ghee, oil, meat, cooked rice, rice cooked
with milk, kṛśarā (preparation of rice and pulse) and meat. This is also administered
with faeces of cow, ass, camel, pig and horse, husked barley, sand, dust, stone pieces,
dried cow dung and iron balls. The former may be prescribed for those suffering from
the disorders of vāta while the latter for the kaphaja disorders. These articles are ap-
plicable in stone fomentation as well, according to necessity. [25-27]

भूगृहेषु व जेनाकेषुमणगृहेषु च । विभुमागूरतयेषु स्वभाष्यः विश्वते सुखम् ।।२८।।

Having been massaged well one is fomented comfortably in ground chambers,
jentāka and hot underground cellars which are heated with smokeless charcoal. [28]

शाम्यापुरीकाः मांगे यथा बलवाशिरासाच । शासमस्थिमणगूरत्, निलेश्वासिलपापृहाः ।।२९।।
इमेलारि समुकाख्या नाड़ीस्वेदे प्रयोजयेत् । देशकालविभागान्या पुण्यकीर्तिः भिषक् ।।३०।।
वारत्यामुसककेराडशिमुपुलसाम्यैः । यावासकराड़ड़ाकगड़ेरनासकराज व ।।३१।।
शोभावनकाकसाली नाड़ीस्वेदे प्रयोजयेत् ।
पूलीकरणमूलम्भां सुरय विक्षेपाराम । पूर्वस्त्रीश सलनेनोजिसैवेदे प्रयोजयेत् ।।३३।।

Meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic animals, milk, goat head; trunk, bile and
blood of pig; oily sesamum seeds–these may be used in pipe fomentation in the form
of decoction by the wise physician who is well conversant with the peculiarities of
place and time and acts rationally. Pipe fomentation may also be prepared from de-
coction of leaves of varuna, guḍūcī, craṇḍa, śigru, mūlaka, sarṣapa, vāsā, vaṃśa,
karaṇja, arka, āśmantaka, sobhāñjana, saireyā, jāti, tulasī and arjaka. The decoction
of bhūtika and bigger five roots mixed with wine, curd water, urines, sour and uncting
substances is also used in pipe fomentation. [29-33]

एत एव च निर्यूहाः प्रयोज्या जलकाष्ठके । स्वेदनाय पृथ्वीशिरकेकांढं कारयेत् ।।३४।।

The very decoctions may be used in water chamber for fomentation as well.
In the same way, the chamber of ghee, milk and oil may also be prepared for
fomentation. [34]

गोधूमशालीर्णाशाचायासनाम्सृदैः । सनेचकिञ्चत्यचनीपरासः प्राशस्ते ।।३५।।
गव्यः सुरपाः किञ्चेत जीवन्या शतपुष्पया । उभया कुड़ठेलाशंभाः पृक्षता धीपयापये ।।३६।।

18 C.S.-I
