98                            CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH.

चर्मक्षोप्योपधाव्यः: श्लोमाभिरपूर्तिभिः । उष्माभरितैलाद्भे च कौशेयासिकवाटकैः ।।३७।।

Poultice fomentation may be prepared with wheat chips or barley flour mixed
with sour and unctuous substances, yeast and salt. Poultice may also be prepared from
aromatic drugs, wine yeast, jīvantī and śatapuṣpā, and also from linseed combined
with kuṣṭha and oil. This type of fomentation may also be managed by bandaging the
part with hide, free from hairs and foetid smell, of uṣṇa vīrya (having heating effect).
In case of their non-availability, silken, woollen or cotton cloth may be used for band-
aging. [35-37]

रात्रौ बद्धं दिवा मुह्द्बेद्बद्जो दिवा क्द्जौद्जौ । विद्बद्ज्बद्ज्ज्द्जिविहाराह्द्जि, स्द्जिजि्द्जिकद्जिशि्द्जिजि्द्जिनिजशीतजम् ।।३८।।

In order to prevent burning sensation, the bandage applied in night should be
removed in (the succeeding) day; likewise, that of day should be removed in night.
In cold season, the duration of bandaging may be prolonged. [38]

सङ्ष्द्जर: प्रस्तरो नादद्जौ परिशेकोऽवगाहम् । जेन्द्जौक्द्ज्ज्द्जौ्द्जिज्जिजजजि : क्द्जर्द्जौ : क्द्जुटी च् कुम्द्जिजि्द्जौ च ।।३९।।
कूप्द्जौ हाोत्द्जौ इत्द्जौवै स्द्जैद्ज्द्बस्द्जौद्जिजज्द्जौ्द्जौ ज्द्जौ्जि्द्जिनि : तज्द्जश्ज्द्बौ्द्जौ्द्जिज्द्जिजजि वव्द्जश्द्जुद्जुज्द्जि : क्द्जिजज्ज्द्जि्द्जिजि्द्जि्द्जि : ।।४०।।

Saṅkara, prastara, nādī, pariṣeka, avagāhana, jentāka, aśmaghana, karṣū, kuṭī,
bhū, kumbhikā, kūpa and holākā–these are the thirteen types of fomentation. (I) will
describe all these in order. [39-40]

तत्र पक्ज्ज्द्जौद्जिविजज्द्जिज्द्जौद्जर्द्जिजिजजशिविशजष्द्जिजिजिनिजि्द्जिजि्द्जिज्द्जि्द्जिजिजि्द्जिज्जिजिजिज्द्जिज्द्जि्द्जिज्जि्द्जि्द्जिजजजज्जिजजश्द्जिजजि्द्जिज्द्जि्द्जि्द्जिजजज्द्जिजिजजजिज्द्जि्द्जिश्जिज्जि्द्जिजज्जिजजजजिजज्जिजजिजिजज्द्जिजजज्जिजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजज ।।४१।।

Fomentation with bolus, wrapped in cloth or not, is known as saṅkaraswed (bolus
fomentation). [41]

शुक्द्जिज्द्जिज्जान्द्जिज्जि्द्जिज्जिजज्द्जौद्जि्द्जिजज्जिजजजजजजज्जजजजजजज्जजज्जजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजज ।।४२।।

Fomentation applied to one having been well-massaged and sleeping on a couch
of the chaff of awned and leguminous grains or vesavāra, pāyasa (rice cooked with
milk), kṛṣarā (preparation of rice and pulse), utkārikā (a semi-solid preparation) etc.
well covered with silken or woollen sheet or leaves of both types of eraṇḍa and arka is
known as prastara sweda (bed fomentation). [42]

स्वेदद्ज्द्ज्ज्बिश्द्ज्द्बिजज्द्ज्द्जौद्जिजजजज्जिज्जि्द्ज्द्जिज्द्जिजजिजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजज्द्जजजजज्द्जिजजज्द्जिजज्द्जि्द्जिजजजजज ।
सद्ज्द्ज्द्जौद्ज ्द्जौद्ज्द्बौद्जौद्जौ ्द्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ्जौ ।।४३।।

Drugs for fomentation–roots, fruits, leaves, sprouts etc., or flesh, head, feet etc.
of animals and birds of hot nature, mixed with sour, salt and uncting substances
according to necessity; or urine, milk etc. are boiled in a small pitcher which does
