XIV]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                   99

not emit vapour. This vapour is carried to the patient massaged with vāta-allevi-
ating oil (for fomentation) through a pipe made of reed, bomboo leaves or the leaves
of karañja and arka, bent at two or three places, and well-covered on holes with the
leaves of vāta-alleviating plants. The pipe should be like the forepart of the trunk of
an elephant, having vyāma (91.44 cm.) or ardha vyāma (45.72 cm.) length, 1/4 vyāma
(22.86 cm.) circumference in proximal, 1 and 1/8 vyāma (11.43 cm.) in distal end.
Vapour travelling through zigzag course loses its intensity of impulse and as such
provides fomentation comfortably without producing burning effects on skin. This is
pipe-fomentation. [43]

वातिकैरूतरङत्द्बौद्जिनद्ज्द्ब्द्जौ : द्जिज्द्जिश्द्जिशि्द्जिज्द्जिशिज्जिजि्जिजि्द्जिज्जजिविजिजजजजजज्द्जिजजज्द्जिजजशिजिजजजज्जजजजजजजजजजजजज्जजजजजजजजजजजजज ।
सोऽज्द्जिजिज्द्जिज्जिज्द्ज्द्जिजजजजज्जिजजजज्द्जिजज्द्जिजज्द्जिज्द्जजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजज ।।४४।।

Having filled up small pitchers, multi-holed containers and pipelike containers
with warm decoction of root etc. of drugs efficacious in vātika or pra-vātika disor-
ders, the patient well massaged with suitable medicinal uncting preparations and cov-
ered with a cloth, should be applied showers. This is shower-fomentation. [44]

वा्द्बद्ज्द्बजजजज्द्ज्द्जौद्ज्द्बौद्जिज्द्जौद्जिज्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्ज्द्जौद्जौद्जौद्ज्द्जौद्ज्द्जौद्ज्द्जौद्जौद्ज्द्जौद्जौद्जौद्ज्द्जौद्ज्द्जौद्ज्द्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौद्जौ ।।४५।।

Fomentation by taking bath in a chamber filled up with vāta-alleviating decoc-
tion, milk, oil, ghee, meat juice or hot water is known as bath-fomentation. [45]

अथ जेन्ताकं चिकौर्षुर्भूमिं परिक्षेताज्ज्द्जिजिज्जि्द्जिजज्जिज्द्जिज्द्जिज्जिज्द्जिजजिजज्द्जिजिज्द्जि्द्जिजजजजज्द्जिजजजजज्द्जिजज्द्जिजजज ।
यथास्द्जौद्जिज्जिज्द्जजज्द्ज्द्जिजजजजज्द्ज्द्जिज्द्जिजज्जिजज्द्जिजजज्द्जिजजजजजज्द्ज्द्जिज्द्जिज्द्जिज्द्जिजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजजज ।।४६।।

Before constructing jentāka, one should examine the land. The land should
be in eastern or northern direction, auspicious, spacious, with black and sweet or
