100                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

golden soil. Here in southern or western bank of a pond, a lake etc. with comfortable
stairs and plane level of ground at a distance of seven or eight aratni (320 cm. or
365.76 cm.) from the water, the temporary room should be constructed which should
face towards east or north and be in front of the ghat (of the lake). The height and area
of the house should be sixteen aratnis (731.52 cm.) and the house should be circular
from all sides, well plastered with mud and with many windows. Inside this room a
benchlike extension of one aratni (45.72 cm.) height and width be provided all along
the wall upto the door. In the centre, there should be a pillar having charcoal-cham-
ber, with many small holes, having a lid, in shape like kandu (a type of oven), made
of mud and having diameter of four hastas (1.8 m.) and height equal to that of a man.
That pillar oven should be filled up with the wood of khadira, aśvakarna etc. and be
ignited. When the physician is assured that the wood is well burnt and smokeless and
the entire room is heated by that fire and is equipped with fomentable heat, he should
admit the patient in, well-massaged with vātahara oil and well-covered with clothes.
While admitting him inside the room, the physician should instruct him like this–O
gentle one ! enter the room for well-being and health. After entering you should get
on the extension and lie down comfortably on both sides in succession. You should
not get down from the extension till you expire even if you are sweating too much and
fainting. Dropped from this extension and not reaching the door, you will expire due
to excessive sweat and fainting. Hence you should never leave this extension. When
you feel–you are free from abhiṣyanda (obstruction in passage due to excess of fluid),
sweat and sliminess are discharged well, all passages are free from obstruction, light-
ness has appeared and constipation, stiffness, numbness, pain and heaviness are gone,
then, following the extension you should reach the door and go out. But immediately
afterwards, with a view to protecting the eyes, you should not use cold water. When
the heat and exhaustion are over, after a muhūrta (about 3/4 hour), you should take
ablution with warm water and then take meals. This is jentāka sveda (special room
fomentation). [46]

शयनस्य प्रमाणेन पनसमानमयंभि शिलाम् । तापयित्वा माकालेट्दर्भिः संशेद्धयेत् ।।४७।।
व्यञ्जेऽञ्जन समंभिज्ञारात् प्रोक्ष्य कौशेयशाणिना । तां शिलामध्य कृत्वाभि कौशेयकिंचरंसंस्तरम् ।।४८।।
तस्यां स्वयमुत्सरांगिं स्वप्न स्थितां न सुखम् । कौरयांनिककौशेयाचारागैः सुसंवृतः ।।४९।।
इन्यूक्तोऽञ्जनपात्येव;

A solid stone slab of the man's size should be heated with vāta-alleviating
wood. Thereafter removing all the charcoal, hot water should be sprinkled over
that. The slab should be covered with silken or woollen sheet. The patient
should sleep on this, after having been well-massaged, well covered with gown etc.
