XIV]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              101

made of hide, silk. Thus he is fomented comfortably. So stone-fomentation is
said. [47-49]

कर्षूस्वेदः स्वध्यते । खारस्वेखनसम्यः कर्षू स्थानविभाषित ।।५०।।
दीपनैरमृदैपूरितारां कर्षू पुरयेत्मात् । तत्समुपरि शय्यायां स्वप्न् स्थिति वा सुखम् ।।५१।।

Now Karṣūsweda (trench fomentation) is described. The physician, considering
the space, should get a trench dug below the cot and fill it up with smokeless burning
charcoal. The patient sleeping on the bed above (the trench) is fomented
comfortably. [50-51]

अवगूढपिभवमाणं वृषाकारगलोलनाम् । घवधिभि कुटी कृत्वा कुष्ठाढैः संश्लेषयेत् ।।५२।।
कुटीमध्ये भिक्षया शय्यां वालगौशीमृगकमलोकैः । प्राग्रशिनिकोनुभिगारुजभूपमलगोलैकेः ।।५३।।
हस्तिनिकाभिरग्नुपूर्णाभिरनः परं संशयेः । पीतावशिनासरोदेश्वभ्यंशः विस्वते सुखम् ।।५४।।

A cottage room should be constructed with thick walls, not very high and wide,
circular, without any window and plastered with kuṣṭha etc. the physician should keep
a cot; well equipped with gown, hide, silken sheet, carpet, blanket and round cap,
in the centre and should surround it entirely with furnaces filled up with charcoal.
Now the patient, well-massaged, should get on the cot and is thus fomented comfort-
ably.[52-54]

य एवाग्माचनस्वेदविषिभिप्रौ स एव तु । प्रशस्तागं निवातागं समाग्मुपदिश्यते ।।५५।।

In Bhūsweda (ground fomentation), the method prescribed for stone fomentation
is followed, the ground should be spacious, free wind and even. [55]

कुम्भी वातहराकाथपूर्णी भूमी निखात्यते । अर्धगर्भे त्रिभागे वा श्वयम तत्र चोपरि ।।५६।।
स्थापयेदासनं खाड्यि नाति तान्यपिचदनम् । अत कुम्भां सुसन्तापतां प्रक्षिपेदयसो गुड़कम् ।।५७।।
पाषाणान् वोषणा जेन सलाः स्थितौ वा सुखम् ।सुसंलुप्तः स्वस्थः लन्वेरोनलाश्चः ।।५८।।

A small pitcher, filled up with decoction of vāta-alleviating drugs, should
be buried in ground upto half or one-third part of it. Over this, a cot or a chair should
be kept with not very thick sheet covering. Now, into the pitcher, well-heated
iron balls or stone (chips) should be put. By this the patient, well-massaged with
vāta-alleviating uncting substances and well-covered is fomented properly sitting or
lying there. [56-58]

कूपं स्वधनंदैः द्विगुणं गर्ति खेदेत् । देशे निवाते शास्ते च कृत्वादिशःसुगाग्नितम् ।।५९।।
हस्तधगोगोलागौणं करिणीईंदैगूमुरि । स्वस्थपूः सुसंलीगंख्यः स्थितः विस्वति वा सुखम् ।।६०।।

A well of the cot's area and twice deep should be made in wind-free and auspi-
cious place, after cleaning its interior properly, it should be filled up with the dung of
elephant, cow, ass and camel and ignited, when it is burnt properly, the patient, hav-
ing been well massaged, should lie down well-covered on the well-covered bed. Thus
he gets fomented comfortably. [59-60]
