XVI                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              105

लेपनानोदकमधुघृतसुराली वीकतुभेदकरैरमेदकदिविधभमकोदितैश्चान्यान्नप्रशृणि च, तथा शालिषष्टिकाणुम्ब-
पयःतिलतुलत्याकद्रवशीघ्राकाशरणचेरुकान्धभ्रामकाकिंविलशाणिः, यान्तिचाणि च सेइङोदतेरोकस्याणि स्वाभिः,
तदेशोदेहारतुलीणकोभवाभाशिः, संग्रहणोदयीणमीपांयानीयोरुग्रमनोरात्तिसमश्चखांति चौषणांत्रि; यच्चान्यद्धि
किंचिदव्याध: परिसंगतांस प्राधिकारात्मापूधकरणां विद्यांत, एवम् प्रतिभोगेन, तताहुपकल्पयेत् ११११

     Then arrangements are to be made for attendants, such as cook for preparing
pulses and soups, cook for rice, bath attendant, shampooer, lifter, helper in lying down
and drug-grinders, who are endowed with good conduct, cleanliness, good behaviour,
affection, dexterity and favour; expert in attendance, conversant with and favourable
for all the works. There should also be experts in (vocal) music, instrumental music,
speech, verses, stories, narratives, history and ancient lores and also companions who
know the desires, are favorites and are acquainted with place and time. Birds and
animals like common quail, grey partridge, hare, black buck, antelope, blacktailed
deer, red deer and wild sheep should also be there. A milch cow with good temper,
free from disease and having calf alive along with all the necessary arrangements for
her such as fodder, shelter and water-should be there. Arrangement should also be
made for dish, waterpot, water reservoir, manika, ghata and pitcher (earthen jars of
different sizes), boiling pan, small and big pitchers, saucer, ladle, mat, bucket, cook-
ing utensils, churning stick, leather, cloth, thread, cotton, wool etc.

     Beds and chairs should be provided with a (flower) vase and spitoon, bed well-
equipped with carpet, bed sheet and pillow alongwith supporting pillows; and should
be comfortable for attending to lying down, sitting, unction, fomentation, massage,
pasting, showering, after-paste, emesis, purgation, non-unctuous and unctuous en-
ema, head-evacuation, urination and defaecation. There should be stone slabs (for
grinding)–smooth, coarse and medium–alongwith well-washed pestles, sharp
equipments (spade, scissors etc.), smoking pipe, pipe for enema and douches, broom,
weighing scales and measuring vat. Articles like ghee, oil, fat, marrow, honey, phānita
(a type of jaggery), salt, fuel, water, wines, vinegar of various types, curd, curdwater,
butter milk and urines; grains like fāli, saṣṭika (rice), green gram, black gram, barley,
sesamum, horse gram, jujube, grapes, gambhāri, paruṣaka, haritaki, āmalaka and
bibhitaka. Various accessories for unction, fomentation and drugs-emetic, purgative,
emetic-purgative, astringent, appetiser, digestive, etc. In addition to the listed above,
whatever equipment is necessary for counter-acting the complications and promoting
pleasure should be arranged. [7]

तत्त्वं पुत्रम् यन्मिकाण्यां स्नेहदेशांयां यचाचॄपग्मांदेशे, यं भेद्यिसांजरे पाश्च: शारीरी वा व्याधि:
कश्चिद्विचत: महाता‌व्याग्रक्षेमये तावद्वयोपाशितिगूँ यतेत, तत्तत्नुयाद्यात् तावन्नतीते कालं वायाचिमनीते
कर्म्मणाचरेत् ११११

19 C.S.-I
