106                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

    Then the patient should be administered with unction and fomentation as said
earlier. During this period if he is attacked suddenly with some severe mental or
physical disorder, he should be reverted back cautiously and meanwhile the same
treatment should continue. [8]

    तलरं धृतं स्नेहेस्वेदोपश्रमनुपूहतमसम्यग्भवीषु सुखोचितं मुखप्रतीपमंक शिरः स्नातमनुलिप्तगात्रं संगिणमनु-
महत्वत्कलंतिं देवाग्निद्विजगुरुवृद्धवैद्यानतिभक्तनमित्रं नक्षत्रतिथिकरणमुहूर्तं कारिणिया ब्राह्मणाः स्वस्तिवाचनं
प्रयुक्ता-भिरशितीरिरमिचिन्तां मधुमधुकलौणायणिंहषिहां मदनफलकाषायाणां पाययेत् ।।९।।

    After he is treated with unction and fomentation and is cheerful and having
observed that-he is seated comfortably, his food is well-digested, he has taken bath
by head, annointed his body, put on a garland and undamaged cloth has worshipped
the deity, fire, brāhmaṇa, preceptor, elderly persons and the physician, the physician
should, in auspicious time (nakṣatra, karaṇa and muhūrta), should request Brāhmaṇas
to recite swasti-vacana (mantras) and bestow their recital blessings on the drug–a
dose of the decoction of madanaphala added with honey, madhuka, rock salt and
phāṇita–which should then be administered to the patient. [9]

    मदनफलकाषायमात्रामपां तु छद्रु सर्वसंशोधनमात्रामपाणानि व प्रतिपुरुषपेक्षितेनापि भवंति; यावद्बि यस्य
संशोधनं पीतं वैकारिकदोषहरणायोपयते न चातियोगायोगाय, तावद्मत मात्रापरगं वेदितव्यं भवति ।।१०।।

    The measure of the dose of the madanaphala decoction and also of all the
evacuative drugs is to be determined according to the person concerned. The quantity
which on administration to a person eliminates the abnormal doṣa but does not pro-
duce conditions of under-use or over-use should be taken as the measure of dose for
that person. [10]

    पीतवतं तु खल्वेनं मुहूर्तमुपकाशेत, तस्य यदा जानीयात् स्वेदाद्विभवेत् दोषं प्रतिलमनपायप्र भावं,
लोमहर्षणं च स्याद्येन: उच्चलितं, कुक्षिमात्रागतान्तं च कुक्षिमुगंते, हरलासास्तस्यवणभ्यामिव धोर्थकुंभीभूतान,
अथास्मे जाडुस्यम-येवांयु धृयुकांधारतरभक्तद्रोश्यासि सोपायत्परुषेसू अवशर्ध, प्रतिभाजीपिचारवंरो,
लालाढटातिचेवं पटोषीपदेशे नाभिमूलोपाने मयागवणाणिः प्रहृष्टोठुणास: प्रयत्नेत् ।।११।।

    After the patient has taken the drug, he should be observed for a while. When
there is appearance of sweat, it indicates that the doṣa has been liquified. Likewise,
horripilation will indicate the movement of doṣa from its upward tendency. Now
the patient be got seated on a cot which is of knee-height, comfortable, well-equi-
pped with carpet, badsheet and pillow alongwith accessory support. Spitoons
should also be kept there. In supporting his head and sides, pressing the navel
