XV]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  107

[Devanagari unclear: long passage on signs of inadequate, proper and excessive administration]

These are the signs and symptoms of inadequate, proper and excessive adminis-
tration of drug such as–absence of bout or occasional bout, vomiting of the entire
drug only and bouts with obstruction–these are the symptoms of inadequate adminis-
tration of drug. If the drug is administered properly, there will be timely vomiting
with not much uneasiness, elimination of doṣas in order and automatic stoppage of
vomiting. This has been divided into three groups–intense, soft and medium accord-
ing to the quantity of doṣas (eliminated). If the drug is administered in excessive dose
there will be appearance of foam, blood or brightness in the vomit–these are the symp-
toms of complications caused by over-administration. Due to excessive and inadequate administration
of drug due to tympanitis, colic pain, secretion, palpitation, bodyache, dis-
charge of pure blood, frequent vomiting of viscera, stiffness and exhaustion. [13]

[Devanagari unclear: post-emetic verse]

On proper administration of drug when the patient has vomited well, he should
wash hands, feet and face well and after having been assured for a while, he should
use one of the three types (unctuous, evacuative and pacifying) of smoking according
to his strength. Then he should take ablution. [14]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on regimen]

After this, the patient should be taken into a wind-free room and be asked to lie
down, then he be instructed as "loud speaking, too much sitting, standing or walking,
anger, grief, snow, the sun, dews, travelling on vehicles, sexual intercourse,
night keeping, day-sleep; antagonistic, during indigestion, unwholesome, untimely,
less in quantity and nutritive value, heavy or irregular diet; suppression or propulsion
of natural urges–these should not be observed in thought and thus the patient
should be passed: the patient should be fed. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: dietary verse on saṃsarjana krama]

Then in the same evening or next morning, after taking ablution with lukewarm
water, he should take, according to his appetite, the lukewarm, well-cooked, scummy
gruel of red rice. The same is repeated in second and third meal-times. In fourth meal-
time, well-cooked pasic-like preparation of red rice alongwith warm water should be
taken without or with a little uncting substance and salt. The same is followed in fifth
and six meal-times. At the seventh meal-time he should take well-cooked red rice
alongwith dilute green gram soup mixed up with a little uncting substance and salt;
and warm water should be taken after food. This is to be repeated for eighth and ninth
meal-times. In tenth meal-time (cooked rice), alongwith light and dilute meat soup of
birds like common quail, grey partridge etc. added with salt should be taken
and after food warm water is to be taken. This is followed in eleventh and twelfth meal-
times. After this, the patient assimilating nutrition from the diet gradually, should
revert to normal diet in seven nights. [16]
