110                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

मलापहं रोगहरं बलवर्णप्रसादनम् । दीर्घं संशोधनं सम्यगायुषा युज्यते चिरम् ।।२२।।

The evacuative therapy eliminates excreta, alleviates diseases, improves
strength and complexion and, if administered properly, endows the person with a
long life. [22]

तत्र श्लोकाः–
ईश्वराणां वसुमतां वमनं संविरेचनम् । संभारा ये यदर्थं च समारीच प्रयोजयेत् ।।२३।।
यथा प्रयोज्या मात्रा या यदुयोगस्य लक्षणम् । योगातियोगयोगिच्च दोषा वे चाप्युपद्रवाः ।।२४।।
यदस्तेयं विशुद्धेऽङ्गे सासर्जनक्रमः । तत् सर्वं कल्पनान्वायं व्याजहार पुनर्वसुः ।।२५।।

Now (the summing up) verses–

The management of emesis and purgation for the kings and the wealthy persons,
equipments required, the dosage, symptoms of adequate, inadequate and excessive
administrative doses, the complications, the things prohibited for the evacuated and
the dietitic order–all this has been said by Punarvasu in the chapter on arrangement
for equipments etc. [23-25]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने उपकल्पनीयो
नाम पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः ॥१५॥

Thus ends the fifteenth chapter on arrangement of equipments etc. in
Ślokasthāna in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted
by Caraka. (15)

                                  •

षोडशोऽध्यायः

CHAPTER XVI

अथातश्चिकित्साप्राभृतीयमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on the physician equipped for treatment
etc. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥२॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

चिकित्साप्राभृतो धीमान् शास्त्रवान् कर्मदर्शयः । नरं विरेचयेद् यं स योगात् सुखमश्नुते ।।३।।
यं वैद्यानभी लबुधो विरेचयति मानवम् । सोऽतियोगायोगाभ्यां मानवो दुःखमश्नुते ।।४।।

If the physician having all the equipments for treatment and who is wise, learned
and active treats a patient with purgation, he (the patient) enjoys happiness due to
proper administration. On the contrary, if a patient is treated with purgation by an
ignorant physician he is subjected to miseries because of (complications arising from)
excessive and inadequate administration. [3-4]
