112                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

जरां कृच्छेण लभते चिरं जीवत्यनामयः । सम्यात् शोधनं काले युक्तिवुक्तं विवेकतः ॥१९॥

In the person whose belly has been evacuated, the body-fire is stimulated diseases get pacified, normalcy is maintained; sense organs, mind, intellect and complexion are improved, strength, nourishment, progeny and potency are produced the old age does not get his hold easily and the man lives long free from disorders. Hence one should use the evacuative therapy timely and properly. [17-19]

दोषाः कदाचित् कुप्यन्ति निता लङ्घनधूमैः । जिताः संशोधनैर्ये तु नैते पुनरुदयः ॥२०॥
दोषाणां च यथामूलं च शूलेन्द्रोद्गमः सति । रोगाणां प्ररोहस्य च संशमनागतिस्तिः ॥२१॥

Dosas might sometimes aggravate even after treatment with lightening and digestion but they never recur if they are subdued with evacuative therapy. In case of dosas as well as plants, if the root is not striked at, reappearance of the gone disorders and sprouts (respectively) is certain. [20-21]

भेषजपीडितं यथाचारैरेव बृंहणम् । घृताम्भसरसहीरावझूपभोगसंहितैः ॥२२॥
अभ्योहितलादनैः स्नानविलेपः स्नेहबस्तिना तथा । जन्म स लभते यृक्तिं जन्म रोगैर्यान्ति चिरम् ॥२३॥

In person reduced by evacuative therapy the body should be promoted with intake of nourishing diet together with ghee, meat soup, milk and relishing vegetable soups, massage, annointing, bath, unctuous and non-unction enema. In this way, he obtains well-being and is endowed with long life. [22-23]

अतियोगानुबंधानां सर्पिःपानं प्रशस्यते । तैलं मधुरकैः सिद्धमवयवाम्बुपानत्वम् ॥२४॥
वस्त्र तैलोपयोगे तु पुनः संशोधनेन च । याथाकालेनालेपाभ्यां प्रत्युत च दिनार्दयुनम् ॥२५॥
स्नेहने स्वेदने शुद्धिः रोगाः संसर्गे च ते । जावनेऽपि वागभिडितं तेषां निदिध्यं साधनम् ॥२६॥

For the patient suffering from excessive administration (of evacuative therapy) the intake of ghee, oil processed with sweet drugs or unctuous enema is recommended. In case of inadequate administration, he should be uncted and then again treated with evacuative therapy keeping in view the dosa, fire and strength and also the previous regimen. Management of the disorders which arise during improper administration of unction, fomentation, evacuation, dietitic regimen has been described in siddhi-section. [24-26]

जायन्ते हेतुवैष्याधीयमा देहधातवः । हेतुसाम्ये च समासेषां स्वस्थयोगः सदा ॥२७॥

The dhātus of the body get into disequilibrium with the imbalance of the cause and they enjoy equilibrium when the cause is in balance. Their (dhātus) termination is always natural. [27]

प्रभूतहेतुभावेन च नित्यमेति प्रजायते । कैश्चित्कारणं मन्यते हेतुरोहरणम् ॥२८॥

There is always a cause in production of beings but no one is their annihilation though some regard non-initiation of cause as the cause in the latter case. [28]
