XVIj                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              113

एवमुक्त्वाभगवानग्निवेशेऽग्निवेशस्य ब्रध्याचार । स्थायोऽपरमे कर्म चिकित्साप्रभृतव्ये किन्तु ।।२९।।
पेचकीर्वियमान् धातून् कान् समीकुर्वते चिकित्सः । का वा चिकित्सा भगवतः किं कर्म वा युज्यते ।।३०।।

After the preceptor finished his above talk, Agniveśa put a query–if there is
termination (of disorder) by nature then what is the function of a well-equipped phy-
sician? What imbalanced dhātus he brings to equilibrium by means of therapy? What
is the nature of therapeutics and its objective? [29-30]

तच्छ्रुत्वायचनं वृत्तां व्याजसार पुनर्वसुः । श्रृणुतामा या साम्या पुत्रिलिस महर्षिभिः ।।३१।।
न नाशकारणाभावात् नाशानां नाशकारणम् । हायते निगयारयेण कालत्वादयवायुतम् ।।३२।।

After having heard the question of his disciple, Punarvasu said–O gentle one! I
hear the agrument which is put forth (in this respect) by the great sages. Due to ab-
sence of the terminating cause, the cause of annihilation of beings is not observed as
in case of eternally moving time due to its fast movement. [31-32]

शौप्रभावाच्या भूतलस्य भावो विचरते । निरोधे कारणं सत्ये नास्ति वैयन्यादात्मकः ।।३३।।

The being is terminated as it came into existence. There is no causative factor in
its annihilation nor is its transformation. [33]

याभिः क्रियाभिर्जायन्ते शरीरे धाताः समाः । तां चिकित्सा विकाराणां कर्म संक्षिपताः सूचम् ।।३४।।
कात्थं शरीरे धातूनां वैषम्यं भ भ्रंशदिते । सममां पदानुबन्धः स्थादन्यश्च किंचिद् टिप्पक ।।३५।।
व्यगाधिकृतेर्वतां समानां योप्तसेचनात् । विषया गतुष्यन्ति जायन्ते वाताः समाः ।।३६।।
समैलु हेतुभिर्हेतुभ्यासाश्च सावत्पैः समया हे । चिकित्साप्रायत्यात्मकमातां देहडुधातुमु ।।३७।।
धन्यस्थार्येण कापस्य सूलोकाख्यौभयस्य च । दाता सम्पद्यते वैद्यो नागाल्यैसुखायुभूम् ।।३८।।

The measures by which the bodily dhātus are brought back to equilibrium consti-
tute the therapeutics (treatment of disorders). This is the function of the physician.
The therapy is administered with the objective that there should not be disequilibrium
in dhātus and that there should be promotion of dhātus which are in equilibrium. By
abstaining from the factors causing disequilibrium and pursuing those causing equi-
librium, the imbalanced ones are produced. As the well-equipped physician leads to
production of balanced dhātus by means of balanced factors, he is regarded as donor
of health, happiness and longevity. The physician, by dint of bestowing health, hap-
piness and longevity, becomes also the donor of virtue, wealth, enjoyment and both
the human worlds. [34-38]

तह श्लोकाः:–
चिकित्साप्रभृतवयुषी दोघो महेत्तराचः । चोगायरोगणियोगान् लघुणे मुखिसंचयम् ।।३९।।
बहूतोनस लिखुतिं संगोवेत्गमुपाः च ये । चिकित्साशुचमाने च चिकित्साणायिसंसयम् ।।४०।।
या च मुचिकित्सिकासां सं चार्थ कुकुते चिकित्स । चिकित्साप्रभुतेऽस्यते तत् तर्थभवदायुनिः ।।४१।।

Now (the summing up) verses–

20 C.S.-I
