XVIII                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    115

portional variations of dosas. Wastings are eighteen and seven diabetic boils. Move-
ment of dosas is of three types. Now hear the details. [3-7]

संधारणातिसङ्गवन्ताश्री जागरणान्दस्तु । उर्ध्वांभाग्यद्वयचाचाः प्रमत्ताक्षतिचीचुनाः ।।६।।
मन्दावलम्भान्थाजोगर्भिणीभाषाः । मृद्वलक्षरिणाल्नादति शीताम्बुसेवनाः ।।७।।
तिरोऽभिचालव्यदुराचारामुनिभरहाः । मेषगमनस्वतायादशकालविपर्ययाः ।।८।।
चाहायः मृषुल्यति शिरस्कसे च दुष्पति । ततः जिरति आत्रनो रोगे विविधाकाचाः ।।९।।

Suppression of urges, day-sleep, night vigil, narcosis, loud speech, dew, easterly
wind, excessive sexual intercourse, inhalation of unsuitable smell, exposure to dust,
smoke, snow and the sun, intake of heavy, sour and salads, drinking of too much cold
water, head injury, vitiated āma, weeping, suppression of tears, clouds, mental abnor-
mality, use of those unsuitable for place and time–these factors vitiate vāta etc. and
also blood in the head which produce various types of diseases in head. [8-11]

प्राणः प्राणभृतां वर विनः संनिद्रुणोति च । मधुरायमुभगानि शिरस्तत्रभिमयेयो ।।२।।

That where vital breath of living beings is located and also all the sense organs,
and which is the best of all organs is known as head. [12]

अर्धभेदको वा स्वाप सर्व था रुपनी शिरः । प्रतिचमुनुसामरिणाविनिशिरोभ्रमः ।।३।।
अर्दित शिरसः कर्पो गलन्धजवदुसः । विविधाकारेर रोगं वाताविक्रियसंभवाः ।।४।।

Pain in half or entire head, coryza, disorders of mouth, nose, eyes and ear, giddi-
ness, facial paralysis, tremors in head, stiffness, in back neck and jaws and other
various disorders due to vāta etc. (dosas) and krimis (organisms). [13-14]

पृथिवीशालु ये वद्ध सद्धे परमतिभिः । शिरोगन्धांसाक्षुव्ये यधाशर्वेहुलसणे ।।५।।
उर्ध्वाभिगतिशाभाम्यों शीतायातनाः प्रमाणतः । शीतापतेत्ससर्गस्वार्दत्याग्वयाचिलिनिभाः ।।६।।
उपयायाःभीवाताविक्रयभादति । वायाःलक्षपरसारानागिलिकायिणः ।।७।।
शिरोगनाः शिरा वद्धो वायुर्विक्रियं कुण्डति । ततः शूलं महासस्व चालत् सुग्वसक्षपे ।।८।।
निस्तुन्दे भृतो शक्ती संसि वर्धयो । सदृष्यला ललाटे च विष्यणविलिवर्यसे ।।९।।
वध्वते स्वतनः खोरे निविषूत्यभो इम्भिर्गणो । पूर्णोतिव शिरः सर्व सनिश्चिम्ब इव मुझे ।।१०।।
स्पुरन्ति शिरारत्सर्वं स्तम्भते च शिरोग्रहः । निमाषितापुचापृत्ते च शिरोरोगेंश्लिस्थितौ ।।११।।

Now listen about the five head diseases alongwith causes and symptoms as
said earlier by the great sages. Due to loud and too much speech, sharp drinks,
vigil, contact with cold wind, sexual intercourse, suppression of urges, fasting,
injury, excessive vomiting and purgation, tears, grief, fear and anxiety; excessive
exhaustion due to weight-carrying and travelling on foot vāyu gets aggravated
and vitiated and entering into the cranial veins produces these symptoms. There
is intense pain due to vāta particularly in temporal regions and nape, middle of
the eyebrows and forehead have burning sensation and excessive pain. There is dizzi-
