116                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

ness and pain in ears, eyes seem to be coming out (due to pain), the entire head reels
about and seems to be broken on sutures, the venous plexuses have excessive throb-
bing and neck becomes stiff. The patient gets relief from unctuous and hot applica-
tions. This is about head diseases caused by vāta. [15-21]

कट्वम्ललवणक्षारपयुक्तोष्मातपानाम् । पित्तं शिरसि संदूष्टं शिरोरोगाय कल्पते ॥२१॥
दहते रुज्यते तेन शिरः शीतेभ् सुखदे । दहतेऽक्षिणी तृष्णा भ्रमः स्वेदश्च जायते ॥२२॥

By (excessive) use of pungent, sour, salt, alkali, wines, by anger and over
exposure to the sun and fire, pitta gets vitiated and being located in head produces
head diseases. Because of this, the head as if burns and has pain and is pacified
by cold. The eyes have burning sensation and there are thirst, giddiness and perspira-
tion. [22-23]

आस्यासुखैः स्वप्नसुखैर्गुरुनिग्धातिभोजनैः । श्लेष्मा शिरसि संदुष्टः शिरोरोगाय कल्पते ॥२४॥
शिरो भवत्यतो तेन सुप्तं सिमितभारिकम् । भवत्युत्साहनाशश्च तन्द्रा तथाऽरुचिरारोचः ॥२५॥

Due to sedentary habits, too much sleep, over intake of heavy and unctuous
diet, kapha is vitiated and causes head diseases. In this the head has dull pain,
numbness, cold sensation and heaviness. There are also drowsiness, lassitude and
anorexia. [24-25]

वाताद्भ्रमः कम्पः विपाहाहो मदस्तुषा । कफादात्पुल्कं तन्द्रा च शिरोरोगे विदेहभे ॥२६॥

In head diseases caused by all the three doṣas, there are pain, giddiness and
tremors due to vāta; burning sensation, narcosis and thirst due to pitta and heaviness
and drowsiness due to kapha. [26]

तिलक्षीरगुडाचीर्णैर्युतिभुक्स्रोणिसत्कृताः । क्लेदोऽधूकफमांसानां दोषांस्त्वयोजयाभसते ॥२७॥
ततः शिरसः संस्लेदेणु कित्रयः पापकर्मभिः । जायतेऽपि शिरोरोगो जाता कीभालतालक्षणम् ॥२८॥
व्यपक्षेटदनाभाद्युशूनोदुगैंद्रुचैः । क्रिमिगताद् विचार क्रिमिणीणां दर्शनैश्च ॥२९॥

By (excessive) intake of tila, milk, jaggery; eating during indigestion, putrified
and mixed up food in those having abundance of doṣas, excessive moisture arise in
blood, kapha and muscles. Then due to increase of moisture in head the trouble-
creating organisms cause head disease with loathsome symptoms. One should
diagnose the case of krimiroga (worm-affection) by the symptoms–piercing and
cutting pain, functional disorders, itching, swelling, difficulty in movement–by
observing the worms. [27-29]

शौकोपवासमाध्यायंशहशूभोजनाम् । वायुराविश्य हृदयं जन्यतुत्सृजन्मजम् ॥३०॥
वेद्युगुर्वेव सत्भः प्राणेः शृण्वता दद् । इति शातारुरे कर्षं जीर्षी चायकवैदेवां ॥३१॥

Due to grief, fasting, physical exercise; intake of rough, dry and a little
food the (aggravated) vāyu entering into the heart produces severe disorders. In
