XVII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               119

When kapha, in the event of diminution of vāta, obstructs the normal pitta, it
causes mildness of appetite, stiffness of head, sleep, drowsiness, delirium, heart dis-
ease, heaviness in body, yellowness of nails etc., spitting of mucus and bile.

When vāta is diminished and kapha moves alongwith pitta, it produces anorexia,
indigestion, malaise, heaviness, fatigue, nausea, salivation, paleness, distress, narco-
sis, irregularity in purgation and digestion.

When pitta is diminished and kapha combines with vāta, it causes unstable stiff-
ness, cold and piercing pain, heaviness, mildness of digestion, non-inclination to food,
trembling, whiteness of nail etc. and coarseness of body parts.

When kapha is diminished and both vāta and pitta are aggravated, it produces
giddiness, cramps, piercing pain, burning sensation, cracking, trembling, bodyache,
wasting, distress and fuming.

In diminution of vāta and pitta, kapha, blocking up the channels, produces loss of
movement, fainting and difficulty in speech.

In diminution of vāta and kapha, pitta dislocates the ojas and produces malaise,
weakness in sense organs, thirst, fainting and loss of function.

In diminution of pitta and kapha, vāta produces severe pain in vital organs, loss
of sensation or trembling. [45-61]

दोषं प्रवृद्धा: स्वं लिङ्गमुपदर्शयन्तः क्षीणा जहति लिङ्गं स्वं, समाः स्वं कर्म कुर्वते ॥६२॥

Doṣas, if aggravated, show their symptoms according to the strength; if
diminished, give up their normal character and if normal, perform their functions
properly.[62]

मालादीनां रसादीनां मलानामोजसश्च ।   क्षयास्ताधिलादीनामूर्ध्वं संक्षीणलक्षणम् ॥६३॥
पद्भते सहते शब्दं नोच्चैर्भवति शुष्यते ।  हृदयं शाम्यति स्वल्पचेष्टयापि रसक्षये ॥६४॥
पसन्न मूत्रता स्नेहः विशेषेण सिरांणीन्द्रियोद्रेकशूलम् ।  ॥६५॥
सम्मोहः स्फुटनं गालितनिस्तेजसास एव च ।  लक्षणं मेदसि क्षीणे मृदुले चोदरस्य च ॥६६॥
केशलोमनखमुखश्रिगसनस्य एव ।  क्षीणेनास्यायोचे लिङ्गं मांसक्षयस्य च ॥६७॥
शिरोगं इन्द्रं चान्यभिति रुग्विनाशे ।  प्रदरं सततारोगी क्षीणे मज्जनि देहिनाम् ॥६८॥
दौर्बल्यं मुखशुष्कतां वायुसं क्षमः ।  क्षीणे शुक्रे व्यवायशक्तिश्च तनुशोणितम् ॥६९॥
क्षीणे शुक्रे चालनालरुजे मालः ।  क्षुद्रलक्षणमन्यश्च क्षीणे तेजस्यरोचकः ॥७०॥
मलापचयानिष्पत्त ल्षेत् ।  ।  विशूकणं च तत्क्षये चयस्त्रो मलयोः ॥७१॥

Now will be described symptoms of vāta etc. (doṣas), rasa etc. (dhātus), malas
and ojas will be described. The symptoms of diminished vāta etc. have already been
mentioned. (Now the remaining ones are described).

In diminution of rasa, the patient stirs about, does not tolerate loud sound, even
on slight exertion his heart palpitates, aches and (even) fails.
