120                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

In diminution of rakta (blood)–the skin becomes coarse, cracked and
lustreless.

In diminution of māṃsa (muscle)–there is obvious emaciation of buttocks, neck
and abdomen.

In diminution of medas (fat)–there is cracking of joints, anxious expression,
exhaustion and thin abdomen.

In diminution of asthi (bone), there is falling of hairs, nails, beards and mustaches
and teeth, fatigue and laxity of joints.

In diminution of majjā, the bones are weakened and light as if decaying. They
are also always affected with vātic disorders.

In diminution of semen, debility, dryness of mouth, paleness, malaise, fatigue,
impotency and non-ejaculation of semen are the symptoms.

In diminution of faeces, vāta as if pressing the intestines and lifting the belly
upwards moves obliquely and upwards.

In diminution of urine, there are dysuria, abnormal colours in urine, excessive
thirst and dryness of mouth.

In case of diminution of other malas, the respective excretory passages become
vacant, light and over-dried up. [63-72]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on diminution of ojas]

When the ojas is diminished, the person is fearful, weak, always worried,
having disorders in sense organs, deranged lustre and mental ability, rough and
emaciated.

The substance of white or red, slightly yellowish colour which resides in heart is
known as ojas. The person dies if it is destroyed. In the body of living beings the
ojas is produced first. This has the colour of ghee, taste of honey and smell of fried
paddy. [73-75]

(As the bees collect honey from the fruits and flowers, organs of the persons
constitute the ojas with their activities. (1)

[Devanagari unclear: verses on causes of ojas diminution]

Excessive exercise, fasting, anxiety, rough, little and measured diet, wind and
the sun, fear, grief, ununctuous drinks, vigil, excessive discharge of mucus, blood,
semen and other excreta, time-factor (old age and receiving seasons) and injury by
organisms–these are the causes of diminution of ojas. [76-77]
