XVIII] SŪTRASTHĀNA 123

obstruction in throat. In liver abscess dyspnoea, in spleen abscess difficult inspiration, in abscess developed in lumbar region of abdomen pain in sides of abdomen, chest and scapular region; in renal abscess stiffness in back and waist, in umbilical abscess hiccup, in groin abscess weakness in legs and in bladder abscess difficulty and foul odour in urine and faeces is the characteristic symptom. [101]

पक्काभिप्रायूर्ध्वजाः मुखात् स्रावः सव्यति, अधोजाः गुदेन, अभवतस्तु नाभिजाः ।।१०२।।

In abscesses located in upper parts, when they ripen and burst the discharge comes out of the mouth; in those located in lower parts from anus and in those located in navel the discharge comes out of both ends. [102]

आसां हृदभिभवतिशाः परिपक्वाः सापितवातिकी व रसागाः शेषाः तुः कुशलामाशुप्रतिकारिणः चिकित्सक-मासाधयोग्याम्यति । मेरप्तसम्वाहरोलिवाशं विदर्षिः शस्त्रसंयतिशुद्धिप्रतुत्थाशं स्नेहविरेचनैराधेयोपक्रमेत् सर्वशो गुल्मवच्चरित ।।१०३।।

Amongst them, the abscesses located in cardiac region, navel and urinary bladder, those ripened and caused by all the three dosas are fatal. The remaining can be amenable to treatment if some expert and swift-handed physician is found. Hence recently appeared abscess should be treated immediately with unction and purgation because it is (disastrous) like weapon, serpent, lightening and fire. The treatment is followed on the lines for that in gulma. [103]

भवति चास्—

विना प्रमेहस्योपे आयाने तुतमेदसः । तावद्वैता न साक्षन्ते पादग्राह्यानुपरिषद्ः ।।१०७।।
शारावितां कच्छपिका जालिनी चेति दु:सहाः । आयने न जायन्ते न भातिकाः प्रभूतस्लेष्मोद्सेदाः ।।१०५।।
सर्पी चालजी वैत विवर्षा विदर्षी च याः । साध्याः पित्तोल्यशालाशु संभवदल्पमेदसः ।।१०६।।
मर्मस्थे गुदे मणफः स्कन्धे संधिषु घातयोः । आयने न जयत विकारः स प्रमेही न जीवति ।।१०७।।

Here are (the verses)—

These boils arise even without prameha (diabetes) in persons with deranged medas (fat), they do not come to notice till they acquire a large area.

Śārāvikā, kacchapikā and jālinī types of boils are hardly tolerable and severe and arise in person having abundance of kapha and medas. On the other hand, sarṣapī, alajī, vinatā and vidradhī are curable ones. They are dominant in pitta and occur in persons with little medas.

The diabetic who develops boils in vital organs, shoulder, anus, hands, breast, joints and feet does not survive. [104-107]

तथाऽन्याः पिटकाः सति रक्तपित्तशिरसाम्: । पापतुराः पापवुर्वाशं भ्रमतां बेचकव्रपाः ।।१०८।।
मुखस्थ कठिनशाखायाः सुखाः सुश्मायसाखापरः । मर्वशेश मशायोगः स्वस्थायमुलत मकारुकः ।।१०९।।
ता बुद्ध्या मासतर्दगीनां यशावैत्रहुलाशुः । हृश्यत्रुश्चरश्ब्रत्यशु शतगुणं प्रवर्तते ।।११०।।
सूर्दशासमांसशंयोमोहिशाम्द्रवः । तीरेपरेपर्सरोश्याः पिश्काणामुपखाः ।।१११।।
