124                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

(Apart from these) there are other types of boils such as those having red, yel-
low, black, reddish, pale, yellowish, ash-like and deep black colour. Some are soft
while others are hard; some are big while some are small; some of them are slow-
growing while others are fast-growing; some are mildly painful while others are in-
tensely painful. After observing them, one should diagnose according to the respec-
tive causes and symptoms of vāta etc. and treat them immediately before complica-
tion develops. Thus, dyspnoea, gangrene, fainting, hiccup, narcosis, fever, metastasis
and obstruction in vital organs–these are the complications of boils. [108-111]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on threefold movement of doṣas]

Diminution, normalcy and aggravation are three types of movement of doṣas.
The other threefold movement is upward downward and oblique and the other three
types are movement in belly, extremitis (dhātus) and marmāsthi-sandhi (vital organs
and bone joints). Thus threefold movement of doṣas is said.

Accumulation, vitiation and pacification of pitta, kapha and vāta occurs in sea-
sons of rains etc. respectively¹. Thus conditioning is natural by the effect of seasonal
changes. [112-114]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on doṣa movement]

Again, movement (of doṣas) is of two types–normal and abnormal. For instance,
pittam, having the nature of heat, is responsible for digestion in living beings but
when vitiated it causes many disorders. Kapha, in normal state, is (responsible
for) strength but when abnormal becomes excretion. In other words, the normal
kapha is said as ojas while the abnormal one is sinful (cause of various disorders).
Likewise, all the movements are due to (normal) vāta and it is taken as life breath
of the living beings but in abnormal state it produces disorders even obstructing the
life breath. [115-118]

1. Pitta is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in rainy season, autumn and early winter re-
   spectively. Kapha is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in early winter, spring and sum-
   mer respectively. Vāta is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in summer, rainy season and
   autumn respectively.
