XVIII]                        SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  127

[Devanagari unclear: long verse listing seven types of swelling]

Special features are as follows:–

Vāyu, vitiated by cold, rough, light, non-slimy substance, fatigue, fasting, ex-
cessive emaciation and wasting etc. overcoming the twak, māṃsa, rakta etc. produces
swelling. This is quickly arising and subsiding. The part affected becomes blackish or
reddish or has normal complexion, moving, pulsating, with skin and hair coarse, rough
and broken. The person feels that part as if excised, incised, pressed, pierced with
needles, crawled over by ants, has irritating sensation as if pasted with mustard, con-
tracts or expands. This is (the character of) vāta śotha (swelling due to vāta). (1)

Pitta, vitiated with intake of hot, sharp, pungent, alkaline, salt, sour food and
eating during indigestion, and heating with fire and the sun, overcomes the twak,
māṃsa and rakta and thus produces swelling. It quickly arises and subsides. The part
affect has black, yellow, blue and coppery tinge, hot, soft and with brown and cop-
pery hairs. It has burning sensations of various natures, is hot, perspiring, moist and
likes the contact of hot things. Thus is (character of) pitta śotha (swelling due to
pitta). (2)

Kapha, vitiated by use of heavy, sweet, cold and unctous food; over sleep and
absence of exercise etc., overcomes twak, māṃsa, rakta etc. and thus produces swell-
ing. It arises and subsides with difficulty. The part affected is pale, unctuous, smooth,
stable, thick, with white hair tips and tolerant of touch and heat. This is (the character
of) kapha-śotha (swelling due to kapha). (3)

By combination of respective causes and symptoms dwidoṣaja (produced by two
doṣas combined together) swellings occur which are three in number. Likewise, by
combination of respective causes and symptoms of all the three doṣas sānnipātika
swelling arises which is only one. Thus swelling is of seven types. [7]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on twofold classification]

From various points of view, swelling is two types (innate and exogenous),
of three types (caused by three doṣas separately), of four types (caused by three
doṣas and one exogenous), of seven types (caused by three doṣas separately (3)+ by
combination of two doṣas (3) + by combination of three doṣas (1)=, of eight types
(above seven and one exogenous) but basically, swelling is one having protuberance
in common. [8]
