130                          CARAKA-SAMHITA                          [CH

When the vitiated vata is located beneath the skin and muscles producing swelling in abdomen, it causes udara.

When the vitiated vata stays localised in the belly and moves neither upwards nor downwards, it causes anaha.

In the context of swelling, there are other swellings like adhimamsa, arbuda etc. which have specific names and forms.

When all the three dosas aggravate simultaneously and get located at the root of tongue, they produce intense burning sensation, swelling and various types of pain, this quickly fatal disease is known as Rohini. In this the maximum life of the patient is three days. But if treated by an expert physician one recovers immediately. [19-36]

सनि छेध्यनिया रोगाः साध्या दाहणसंसताः । ये हन्दुत्नुकान्ना निश्चयारोण वा पुनः ॥३७॥
साध्याशाधारणे सनि व्याधयो मृदुसंसगाः । स्लावानकृते येचु कर्ण सिस्वल्यसंशयम् ॥३८॥
असाध्याशाधारणे सनि व्याधयो विधयां सताः । साध्याधि छते येचु कर्ण काय विधायकाः भवेते ॥३९॥
सनि चाधारणे रोगे येचु कर्ण न सिध्यति । अपि चलकृतं बालींतं तान् विश्नुप्रवाहन् ॥४०॥
साध्याशीवाराधाध्यक्ष व्यापयो विविधा स्मृताः । मृदुकठामभेदेन ते भवंति चतुर्विधाः ॥४१॥

There are certain curable diseases of severe nature which become fatal in case they are improperly managed or not given adequate treatment. There are other curable diseases which are mild and get alleviated certainly with or without effort.

There are other incurable diseases known as palliable in which even excellent treatment enables the patient to move along. While there are other (incurable) diseases where even the treatment with much effort provided by the ignorant (physicians) does not succeed. The wise (physicians) should not treat them.

Thus diseases are of two types–curable and incurable. Again by dividing them each as mild and severe they become of four types. [37-41]

त एयापरिसंख्येयो भेद्यानाम् भनि ते । ज्ञावर्णसमुपारस्वाोतसंस्कृतनामभिः ॥४२॥
व्यवस्थाकरणे तेषां यताम्सुरेण संग्रहः। तसा प्रकृतिसामान्यं विकारचेपुदिश्यते ॥४३॥

In fact, the diseases are innumerable being divided on the basis of disorder, colour, etiology, symptoms, and name. Their systematisation has been attempted in the form of some gross diseases. However, in other cases, general principle may be followed. [42-43]

विकाराणागकूताणों न विश्नीया कदाचन । च हि संसिकाकारणो नामसीसित शुरा सिस्ति: ॥४४॥
स एव कुपितो दोषः संमुखानविशेषतः । स्वानानगराह्ठीय जनयत्यापान् बाकून् ॥४५॥
तसमाविकाराज्ञतीषिक्षाम्नानगतिम् व । समुत्थानविशेषेण दृष्टया कर्ण समाचरेत् ॥४६॥
यो छेत्तितर्यं झावा कार्मण्यारम्भे षिक्षक् । शान्मूर्य यथान्यायं स कर्मसु न मुह्यति ॥४७॥
