XVIII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               131

The one who can not label a disorder with some name should not feel ashamed
because all disorders have no established footing by name. The reason is that the
same vitiated doṣa causes various disorders according to variation in etiology and
location. Hence one should initiate treatment after having complete knowledge about
the nature of the disorder (pathogenesis), locations and etiological factors. The one
who initiates treatments, after knowing these three, rationally and according to pre-
scribed procedure, does not get confused in actions. [44-47]

नित्याः प्राणभृतां देहे वातपित्तकफाःस्युः । विकृताः प्रकृतिस्था वा तान् बुभुत्सेत पण्डितः ॥४८॥

Vāta, pitta, and kapha, these three are eternally present in the body of living
beings either as normal or abnormal. The learned one should know them. [48]

उत्साहोच्छ्वासःसितासेकः शब्दगतिः स्मृः । समो मोक्षो गतीनां वायोः कर्मानिविकारजम् ॥४९॥
दर्शनं पक्तिरुष्मा च क्षुत्पिपासे द्रवत्वं च । प्रभा प्रसादो मेधा च पित्तकर्मानिविकारजम् ॥
स्नेहो बन्धः स्थिरत्वं च गौरवं बृंहणं बलम् । क्षमा पुत्रिलतोभव कफकर्मानिविकारजम् ॥४९॥

Enthusiasm, inspiration, expiration, movements, normal processing of dhātus and
normal elimination of excreta—this is the normal function of vāyu.

Vision, digestion, heat, hunger, thirst, softness in body, lustre, cheerfulness and
intellect—this is the normal function of pitta.

Unctuousness, binding, firmness, heaviness, potency, strength, forbearance, re-
straint and absence of greed—this is the normal function of kapha. [49-51]

वातं पित्तं कफं चैव लक्षणयत्यते । कर्मसः प्रकृताविकृतिधिवधितो विदिश्यताम् ॥५२॥

The diminution of vāta, pitta and kapha is known by deficiency in normal func-
tion or increase in opposite actions. [52]

दोषवृद्धिर्विशेषांश्च नित्यैः वृद्धिलक्षणः । दोषाणां प्रतिनिर्दिष्टैर्नित्यैः परीक्षते ॥५३॥

The aggravation of doṣas is known invariably by the increase in their normal
functions. Thus, normalcy, diminution and aggravation of doṣas are examined. [53]

तत्र श्लोकाः—
संख्या निमित्तं रूपाणि शोथानां संस्थ्यं न च । तेषां तेषां विकाराणां शोथानांतोशंड पूर्वजम् ॥५४॥
विधिनः पक्तिरुपायो विभिनं विभिमंसंभवम् । प्राकृतं काये दोषाणां लक्षणं ह्रासवृद्धिभिः ॥
योगिलोरुद्योदोत्पलभमगनमदग्मुः । व्याख्यातांशोविकाशोंवे रोगाध्याये युवर्षितः ॥५५॥

Now (the summing up) verses—

Number, causes, symptoms and prognosis of swellings, the precedent swell-
ings in various diseases, types of diseases, three important points, normal functions
and symptoms of diminution and aggravation of doṣas—all this has been explained in
