XIX]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                135

anorexia are those caused by vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta and dislike. Five head
diseases are those caused by vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta and krimi (organisms).
Similar are the diseases of heart. Five types of anaemia are those caused by vāta,
pitta, kapha, sannipāta and earth-intake. Five types of insanity are those caused by
vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta and exogenous factor. (4)

Four types of epilepsy are those caused by vāta, pitta, kapha, sannipāta and
exogenous factor. Similar are the four types of eye diseases, ear diseases, coryza,
mouth diseases, disorders of grahaṇī, narcosis and fainting. Four types of wasting are
due to overwork, suppression of natural urges, wasting and irregular diet. Four types
of impotency are those caused by genetic defect, penile defect, old age and
spermatozoal disorder. (5)

Three types of swelling are those caused by vāta, pitta and kapha. Three types of
leucoderma are–red, coppery and white. Three types of internal haemorrhage are–
upper (from upper parts like mouth, nose etc.) lower (from lower parts like urethra,
anus, and vagina) and both simultaneously from both the above passages including
the hair ducts of skin. (6)

Two types of fever–one caused by cold and amenable to heat and other caused by
heat and amenable to cold, two types of wound–innate and accidental. Two types of
contracture–one external (backward) and the other internal (forward). Two types of
sciatica–one caused by vāta and the other by vāta and kapha. Two types of kāmalā one
located in belly and the other in exterior parts. Two disorders of āma–alasaka and
visūcikā, two types of vāta-rakta–one deep and the other superficial, two types of
piles–one dry and the other moist. (7)

Ūrustambha (stiffness of thigh) is only one caused by āma as well as tridoṣa,
samyāsa (coma) is one due to three doṣas and involving both mind and body.
Mahāgada (great disease) is one which is adherence to unreality. (8)

Amongst twenty types of krimi (organisms) are–two types of those produced
by external excreta namely yūkā and pipīlikā (lice and ticks), six produced in
blood namely–keśāda, lomāda, lomadwīpa, saurasa, audumbara, jantumātr, seven
due to kapha namely, antrāda, udarīveṣṭa, hṛdayāda, curu, darbhapuspa, saugan-
dhika, mahāguda; five in faeces kakeruka, makeruka, lelīha, saśūlaka, sausu-
rāda; amongst twenty types of prameha, those caused by kapha are ten namely–
udakameha, ikṣubālikārasameha, sāṇdrameha, sāṇdraprasādameha, śukla-
meha, śukrameha, śītameha, śanairmeha, siktāmeha and lālāmeha. Those due to
pitta are–kṣārameha, kālameha, nīlameha, lohitameha, mañjiṣṭhā-meha, haridrāmeha.
Those due to vāta are–vasāmeha, majjameha, hastimeha and madhumeha (diabetes).
These are the twenty pramehas. The uterine disorders are twenty. Amongst them four
