XXI                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              137

Now the (summing up) verses—

The diseases in each group having twenty, one and three types of disorders;
eight diseases having two types, ten diseases having four types, twelve diseases with
five types, four diseases having eight types, two diseases with six types and three
diseases with seven types have been mentioned in the chapter on the eight abdominal
diseases. [8-9]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्वे चरकसंस्कृते श्लोकस्थाने सोदरीयो
नामोनविंशोऽध्यायः ॥१९॥

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter on eight abdominal diseases etc. in
Ślokasthāna in the treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by
Caraka. [19]

•

विंशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XX

अथातो महारोगाध्यां व्याख्यास्यामः ॥१॥

Now (I) shall expound the chapter on major diseases. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ॥१॥

As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

चतारो रोग भवन्ति-आगन्तुवातपित्तश्लेष्माणिमेजाः; तेषां चतुर्णामिव रोगाणां रोगलक्षणैर्भवति,
दोषसामान्यात्; द्विविधा पुनः प्रकृतिरेषाम्, आगन्तुनिजविभागतः; द्विविधं चैषामधिकारणम्, मनःशरीरिकविशेष;
विकाराः पुनरपरिसंख्येयाः।देहधातुनानाकृतिकारणलक्षणविकल्पाहेतुप्रकारेणापरिसंख्येयत्वात् ॥३॥

Four (type of) diseases arise–those caused by extrinsic factor, vāta, pitta and
kapha. All four have abnormality in common and from this point of view they are one.
From etiological point of view, they are of two types–exogenous and innate. Their
location is also two-fold–mind and body. But disorders are innumerable because of
innumerable variations in constitution, location, symptoms, etiology and proportion
of causative factors. [3]

मुखादिभिर्वाह्यानामिन्द्रियदंशावलेहाभिघातबन्धनपीडनमर्दनावेष्टनपरिष्टम्भावदाहशस्त्राग्निक्षतविषसंसर्गाद्भवन्ति,
निजस्तु वात पित्तकफानां वैषम्यात् ॥४॥

The exogenous diseases occur due to biting with nails and teeth, exorcism, curse,
contact of evil spirits, injury, piercing, binding, twisting, compression, hanging, burns,
wounds from weapons, thunder-bolt and infection with organisms etc. the innate dis-
orders originate from the disequilibrium of vāta, pitta and kapha. [4]

23 C.S.-I
