138                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

द्वयोस्तु खल्वागन्तुनिजयोः द्वेरणमसात्म्येन्द्रियार्थसंयोगः; प्रज्ञापराधः; परिणामश्चेति ।।५।।

Exciting cause of both the exogenous and innate disorders is unwholesome contact with the sense objects, intellectual error and consequence. [5]

सर्वेऽपि तु खल्वेतेऽभिष्यन्दाऽऽबलारो रोगाः परस्परमनुबन्धिनः, न चाभ्योऽन्तं तत्त्वसङ्घहगत्यन्ति ।।६।।

All these four (types of) disorders, when quite advanced, accompany each other, still they do not create any doubt among themselves. [6]

आगन्तुरि त्वयापूर्वं समुत्पत्तो जातान्तं वातविषादश्लेष्मणां वैषम्यमाप्तद्वति; निजे तु वातविषादश्लेष्माणः पूर्वं वैषम्यमापन्नान्तं जात्यन्तं व्यापादयन्तिवेदनिति ।।७।।

The exogenous disorder is preceded by pain and followed by disequilibrium of vāta, pitta and kapha while in innate disorder the disequilibrium of vāta, pitta and kapha precedes which later on produces pain. [7]

तेषां प्रधानानि दोषाणां शरीरे स्थानविभागं उपदेक्ष्यते; तद्यथा—वातिक: पुरीषाधानं कटिः सक्थिनी पादान्त्रस्त्रीनि पक्काशयश्च श्लोत्सानानि, तासां पक्काशयो विशेषण श्लोतस्थानं; स्वेदो रसो लसीका रक्तिरमाणाशयश्च पित्तस्थानानि, तेषामाशयो विशेषेण पित्तस्थानं; उरः शिरसी ष्ठीवा श्रोण्यमाशयश्च मेदश्च श्लेष्मस्थानानि, तेषामुरो विशेषेण श्लेष्मस्थानम् ।।८।।

Now the division of location of these three doṣas will be explained such as urinary tract, colon, waist, legs, feet, bones and intestines are the location of vāta particularly the intestines; sweat, chyle, lymph, blood and stomach are the locations of pitta particularly the stomach; chest, head, neck, joints, stomach, fat are the locations of kapha particularly the chest. [8]

सर्वशरीरपरश्च खालविषादश्लेष्माणः सर्वाशरीरे कुर्वन्तिकुप्तितिः शुभाशुभानि कुर्वोन्तिकुप्तिभूताः शुभान्युपचयबल-वर्णसात्म्यादीनि, अकुप्तिता पुनर्विकृतिमापाद्य विकारसंज्ञकाः ।।९।।

Vāta, pitta and kapha pervade the entire body and thus produce good or bad consequences in the entire body when non-aggravated or aggravated. In the state of normalcy (they produce) good consequences like development, strength, complexion, cheerfulness etc. while in that of abnormality they cause bad consequences known as disorders. [9]

तत्र विकाराः सामान्यजाः, नानात्मजाश्च । तत्र सामान्यजाः पूर्वमष्टोदरीये व्याख्याताः; नानात्मजाश्लित्वाग्वद्यूथ्याश्च-व्याख्येयाः: । तद्यथा—अशीतिर्विकाराशतिकाराः; चत्वारिशद्पित्तविकाराः; विशंतिः श्लेष्मविकाराः ।।१०।।

These disorders are of two types—one having general cause and the other having specific cause. Amongst them, the general disorders are explained earlier in the chapter on eight abdominal diseases etc., those of the second group will be explained in this chapter. Such as eighty disorders of vāta, forty of pitta and twenty of kapha. [10]
