140                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on vātika characteristics]

In all these vātika disorders–said or unsaid–the following natural and specific
characters are observed, finding which wholly or partly, the expert physicians un-
doubtedly diagnose them as those of the disorders of vāta. They are–roughness, coldness,
lightness, non-sliminess, motion, formlessness and instability are the specific char-
acters of vāta. Vāta, having such characters, produces the following actions in re-
spective organs when enters into them. Such as separation, dislocation, division,
attachment, tearing, malaise, exhilaration, thirst, tremors, circumvention, looseness,
piercing pain, pain, movement etc. and also coarseness, roughness, non-sliminess,
porousness, reddish lustre, astringent taste and tastelessness, wasting, pain, numbness,
contra-ction, stiffness, limping etc. are the actions of vāyu. If these are found in
some disorder that should be diagnosed as vātic one. [12]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on treatment of vāta]

Vāyu is treated with sweet, sour, salted, unctuous and hot therapeutic measures
and also by application of non-unctuous and unctuous enema, snuffing, diet, massage,
annointing, bath etc. in appropriate dose and time. Amongst all of them, non-unc-
tuous and unctuous enema are regarded as the important ones in (the treatment of) vāta
because enema enters into the colon shortly and cuts off the entire pathogenic root of
vāta. Thus when vāta is overcome there, the disorders of vāta in other parts of the
body are pacified like the tree when cut at the root gets definite destruction of its
other parts as stem, branches, aerial root, flowers, fruits, leaves etc. [13]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on paittika disorders]

Hereafter (I) will explain the forty disorders of pitta such as–heating,
scorching, burning, intense burning, fuming, hyperacidity, burning in stomach
and oesophagus, internal burning, burning in scapular region, pyrexia, over-
