XXI                                    SŪTRASTHĀNA                                        141

perspiration, foul smell in body, tearing of body parts, excessive moisture in blood¹,
moistening of muscles, burning in skin, tearing of skin, thickening of skin, urticarial
patches, pustules, internal haemorrhage, haemorrhagic patches, greenishness, yellow-
ness, bluishness, herpes, jaundice, bitterness in mouth, bloody smell from mouth, foetid
smell from mouth, excessive thirst, loss of contentment, stomatitis, inflammation in
throat, inflammation in eyes, inflammation in anus, inflammation in penis, discharge
of pure blood, fainting, green or yellow colour in eyes, urine and faeces–these are the
prominent ones among the innumerable disorders of pitta. [14]

सर्वेषु खल्वेतेषु पित्तविकारेष्युक्तेष्वनुक्तेषु चानेषु विशेषलक्षणान्यप्रधानानि कार्षण्यं स्वल्पस्नेहः; बहुपलत्वं
तदयन्तं वा विष्वग्दोषतः; विवेकिकारणाभ्यासयोगी कुशलः; तथा—औष्ण्यं तैक्ष्ण्यं द्रवत्वमतिलेपो वर्षाः
शुक्लाभाव्यतां गन्धं विशद् रती च बहुद्रावणी सरत्वं च विशेषाभाव्यमिति; एष विशेषाख्यं निरूप्य कर्मणः
स्वाश्रयनिमित्तयत् धवति तं तं शरीराश्रयकर्माभिघाते; तथा—दाहीमयसाक्ष्यकलेद्यकोपकुवागमरागं च
ये गन्धवर्णरसलक्षणे विशेष तं पित्तं सुदर्शितं भिषगी कोपि; तैलिनि विविधकारणेष्वनुमत्रं तत् ।।१५।।

In all these disorders of pitta–said or unsaid–the following ones are the specific
characters and actions finding which wholly or partly the expert physicians diagnose
the case undoubtedly as one of the paittika disorders. Such as–heat, sharpness, fluid-
ity, slight unctuousness, colours except white and reddish, fishy smell, pungent and
sour taste and movability–are the specific character of pitta. This sort of pitta exhibits
the following actions in respective parts where it enters into. Such as–burning, heat,
inflammation, perspiration, moisture, sloughing, itching, discharge and redness
along with the appearance of respective smell, colour and taste–are the action of pitta,
which, if found, indicate undoubtedly the paittika disorders. [15]

तं मधुरतिक्तकाषायशीतैरुपक्रमेण स्नेहविरेकावस्थापनाभ्यङ्गपरिषेचनादिभिरूपक्रमैश्च निवारयेत् कालं च प्रमाणयित्वा;
विरेचनं तु सर्वोपक्रमाणां केवलमेकं विशेषं पित्तस्य केवलमेकमेकमेकं विनिपीतोत्पत्ति-
घकमिति; विविधकारणाद् आमाशयप्रतिष्ठित्वात् केवलाकेवलमतिसारयते; विविधात् व्याधेरे केवलो व्याधेर् शीतीभवति
तस्य ।।१६।।

This should be managed with sweet, bitter, astringent and cold measures and also
by application of unction, purgation, pasting, bath, massage etc. which alleviate pitta,
according to proper dose and time. Purgation is regarded as the most important one
amongst all the therapies for pitta by physician because from the very start on enter-
ing into the āmāśaya (location of āma doṣa) it extracts the entire pathogenic root of
pitta and when it is overcome, the paittika manifestations in the body get pacified like
the fire-chamber which becomes cold when the fire is removed. [16]

श्लेष्मोद्भवेनिं विशिष्टेन ऊर्जयं व्यक्तास्यतः; तथा–रूक्षेड्डे, तन्द्रां च, रिदिणेयः
च,   गुरुताज्ञान च,   आलस्यं च,   मुखाचर्यं च,   मुखमाधुर्यं च,   श्लेष्मोद्गिरणं च,   मलस्थायित्वं
च,

1. Now-a-days some scholars take it as uraemic condition.
