144                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

In the context of body, eight persons are despicable such as–over-tall, over-
short, over-hairy, hairless, over-block, over-fair, over-obese, over-lean. [3]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on demerits of obese and lean]

Amongst them, the over-obese and the over-lean have other despicable features
too. The over-obese has eight defects–shortening of life-span, hampered movement,
difficulty in sexual intercourse, debility, foul smell, over-sweating, too much hunger
and excessive thirst. Over-obesity is caused by over-saturation, intake of heavy, sweet,
cold and fatty diet, indulgence in day-sleeping and exhilaration, lack of mental work
and genetic defect. There is excess of fat in him and further only fat is accumulated
and not the other dhātus so, thus the life-span is shortened; because of laxity, softness
and heaviness of fat there is hampering in movement; due to non-abundance of semen
and the passage having been covered with fat, there is difficulty in sexual intercourse;
due to disequilibrium of dhātus there is debility; foul smell is due to defect and nature
of fat and also sweating, due to association of medas with kapha, its oozing nature,
abundance, heaviness and intolerance to physical exercise there is over-sweating;
because of intensified agni (digestion) and abundance of vāyu in the belly there is ex-
cessive hunger and thirst. [4]

भवति चात्र–

Here are the verses–

[Devanagari unclear: verses on causes of obesity]

Vāyu, due to passage having been obstructed with fat, moves about abundantly
in belly and thus stimulates digestion and absorbs food. Hence the person digests
food quickly and desires excessively the intake of food. In case of delay in taking
food he is afflicted with some severe disorders. These two–agni and vāyu–are par-
ticularly complicating and as such burn the obese like the forest-fire burning the for-
est. In the event of excessive increase of fat, vāyu etc. (doṣas) suddenly give rise to
severe disorders and thus destroy the life shortly. The person is called as over-obese
who, due to excessive increase of fat and muscles, has pendulous buttocks, abdomen
and breasts and suffers from deficient metabolism and energy. Thus described the
defects, cause and symptoms of the obese. [3-9]
