ASUTRASTHANA                                                        145

एतान्युपद्रकारी विशेषाद्विप्रमाकाती । एती हि दुःखः स्थूलं वनद्वयो वर्षं यथा ।।७।।
मेदस्ततीन संयुतो सहलेपालिनावेधः । विकारान् दाक्षाणं कुत्वा नाशयन्नाशु जीवितनु ।।६।।
मेदोमांसातिवृत्तास्य्लस्थित्वनुद्रस्तान् । अयथोपयथोपासाते नरोऽतिस्थूल उच्यते ।।११।।

Here are the verses—

Vāyu, due to passage having been obstructed with fat, moves about abundantly
in belly and thus stimulates digestion and absorbs food. Hence the person digests
food quickly and desires excessively the intake of food. In case of delay in taking
food he is afflicted with some severe disorders. These two–agni and vāyu–are par-
ticularly complicating and as such burn the obese like the forest-fire burning the for-
est. In the event of excessive increase of fat, vāyu etc. (doṣas) suddenly rise to
severe disorders and thus destroy the life shortly. The person is called as over-obese
who, due to excessive increase of fat and muscles, has pendulous buttocks, abdomen
and breasts and suffers from deficient metabolism and energy. Thus described the
defects, cause and symptoms of the obese. [3-9]

इति मेदोविनो दोषा हेतवो रूपमेव च । निर्दिष्टे, वद्यर्ते वाच्यमिताकार्यं लतः चरम् ।।१०।।
सेया बहुप्रप्रानानो तेखूनो प्रतिआशनम् । क्रियातिघोपः शोककाः वेगनिरोधिनिपेधः ।।११।।
सत्ताद्यालोर्न स्नायायाभ्यासः कुलीर्गति । विकारदाद्यरुप: कोधः वृद्ध-एतौकिसुत नरम् ।।१२।।
व्यायामपतिसहिद्यम् ब्लुतिपाद्याभायाव्यम् । क्रूशो न सहते हडदाउतिलतोमात्विद्युतम् ।।१३।।
निलीप काखः काष; कात्ता गुम्भोऽशोदपुराणिश च । क्रूशो आयोऽभिमाचत्वेव रोगाश्च बहूभिशिता ।।१४।।
शुल्फसित्वधुद्रादीयो भयागत्वालगस्सारः । सव्यालस्मिशेठोस्थिकाः स्थूलरूषों नरं भवः ।।१५।।

Hereafter, the features of the over-lean will be explained. Indulgence in rough
food and drinks, fasting, little diet, excessive subjection to evacuative therapy, grief,
suppression of natural urges including those of sleep, non-unctuous anointing in
persons, indulgence in bath, constitution, old age, continued disorder and anger make
a person over-lean. The over-lean does not tolerate physical excercise, over-saturation,
hunger, thirst, disease and drugs and also too much cold, heat and sexual intercourse.
The over-lean often becomes a victim of spleen (enlargement), cough, wasting,
dyspnoea, gaseous tumour, piles, abdominal diseases and also the disorders of grahaṇī.
The over-lean is the person who has dried up buttocks, abdomen and neck; prominent
vascular network; only remnant of skin and bone and with thick nodes. [10-15]

सततं स्यापित्वतेवाततिसतुषणूपुती नरौ । सततं क्षोपरणि हि सत्यनिवृधितेनरीत् ।।१६।।
स्वलित्सकार्ये वर्ष कार्यं समीन्विष्करणी हि ती । पाबुषी ध्यासिदारस्तदेव स्थूलस्तापीति्तेन्दू ।।१७।।

The over-obese and the over-lean are constantly indisposed and as such have
to be managed constantly with bulk-reducing and bulk-promoting measures respe-
24 C.S.-I
