XXIJ                                SŪTRASTHĀNA                                147

रसायनानां वृष्याणां गोभागामुपसेवनम् । इतलादिकार्भकाभाये वृणपूर्वपदं परम् ॥३३॥
अचिन्तनस्य कार्याणां शुद्धे संतर्पणे व । स्वप्रसङ्गाच्च वरी वराह इव पुष्यति ॥३४॥

Sleep, exhilaration, comfortable bed, relaxed mind, calmness; keeping away from
mental work, sexual intercourse and physical exercise; cheerfulness, new cereals, fresh
wine, meat-soup of domestic, marshy and aquatic animals, well-cooked meat, curd,
ghee, milk, sugar-cane, rice, black gram, wheat, products of jaggery, unctuous and
sweet enema, daily oil masage, unctuous annointing, bath, use of fragrance and
galands, white dress, timely drainage of dosas and regular use of bulk-promoting and
aphrodisiac fomulations remove the over-leanness and provide good development to
the person.

One becomes corpulent like a boar by not minding about business, saturating diet
and indulgence in sleep. [29-34]

यदा तु मनसि कल्पाने कर्मालिवतः । विषयेभ्यो निवर्तन्ते तदा स्वपिति मानवः ॥३५॥

When the mind is exhausted and the exhausted sense organs detract from their
objects, the man sleeps. [35]

निद्रायां सुखं दुःखं पुष्टिः कार्यबलक्षयम् । वृषता क्लीवता ज्ञानमज्ञानं जीवितं न च ॥३६॥
अकालेऽतिप्रसङ्गाच्च न च निद्रा निषेवित । सुखायुषी परक्षुण्टी कालरात्रिरिवापरात् ॥३७॥
सैव युक्ता पुनर्युक्ता निद्रा देवायुषा । पूर्वं योगिने सिद्धस्य सत्त्वं बुद्धिरिवागतात् ॥३८॥

Dependant on sleep are happiness and misery, corpulence and leanness, strength
and weakness, potency and impotency, intellect and non-intellect, life and death. Sleep
observed untimely, excessively and negatively takes away happiness and life like the
other death-night. The same, if properly observed, provides happiness and life like
the flashed true knowledge providing accomplishment to a yogin. [36-38]

गीतादायनमच्छीभ्यांभारवाहकविशिंसः । अजीर्णिनः शाखः क्षीण शुष्क बालतपस्विनाम् ॥३९॥
तृष्णातिसारगुल्माना: धारिणी हिक्काः श्वासाः । पलितनिभिन्नताः कल्पना नानामयाम् ॥४०॥
क्रोधशोकभयवशाना दिवाशर्यिस्वभावेकिनाम् । बाहुसंग्ये तथा श्रेणी बायु प्रमानदश्योगि ॥४१॥
भीष्मं स्वादानस्खानिं सर्वास्तने व वाचते । रात्रौणी भागिरेशेणोधानसंस्रम् ॥४२॥

Those who are emaciated on account of singing, reading, drinking, sexual inter-
course, evacuative therapy, weight-carrying and travelling on foot, having indiges-
tion, are injured, wasted, old, children and women; suffering from thirst, diarrhoea,
colic pain, dyspnoea and hiccup; are lean, fallen, wounded and insane, exhausted
by journey and vigils and also by anger, grief and fear and are accustomed to day-
sleep should observe it in all times. Thus they are endowed with equilibrium of dhātus
and strength, kapha nourishes thier body-parts and their life-span becomes stable.
