XXII]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  151

Rūkṣaṇa (roughening) is that which produces roughness, coarseness and non-slimi-
ness. Snehana (unction) is that which produces unction, oozing, softness and mois-
tening. Swedana (sweating) produces sweat and alleviates stiffness, heaviness and
cold. Stambhana (checking therapy) is that which checks the movement of mobile
substances.

The drug possessing light, hot, sharp, non-slimy, rough, minute, coarse, unstable
and hard properties has got mostly the reducing effect. The drug possessing heavy,
cold, soft, unctuous, solid, gross, slimy, dull, stable and smooth properties is mostly
promoting in effect. Rough, light, coarse, sharp, hot, stable, non-slimy and hard
drug is mostly roughening in effect. Liquid, minute, non-stable, unctuous, slimy,
heavy, cold, dull and soft drug is mostly uncting in effect. Hot, sharp, unstable,
unctuous, rough, minute, liquid and stable drug is mostly sweating in effect. Cold,
dull, soft, smooth, rough, minute, liquid, stable and light drug is mostly checking
in effect. [9-17]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on reducing therapy]

Reducing therapy may be applied in various forms such as four types of evacua-
tion, thirst, exposure to wind and the sun, digestive measures, fasting and physical
exercise. [18]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on conditions for reducing therapy]

Those having big body and strength, abundant kapha, pitta, blood and excreta,
and association of (aggravated) vāyu should be subjected to reducing therapy by means
of evacuation. Those afflicted with the diseases of moderate severity and caused by
kapha and pitta like vomiting, diarrhoea, heart disease, cholera, alasaka, fever, con-
stipation, heaviness, eructation, nausea, anorexia etc. should mostly be treated with
digestives in the beginning by the learned physician. These very diseases, when with
little severity, should be overcome with control of thirst and fasting. The diseases of
moderate and little severity in strong persons should be treated with physical exercise
and exposure to the sun and wind. The persons suffering from skin disorders, diabetes
and those using excess of unctuous, channel-blocking and promoting diet and also
patients of vātika disorders should be subjected to reducing therapy in śiśira (late
winter). [19-24]
