152                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: verses on promoting therapy]

Undamaged meat of animals, fish and birds living in suitable environments
and killed with non-poisonous weapons is (the best) promoting one. The persons
wasted, wounded, lean, old, weak, constantly travelling on foot and indulged in women
and wine and also in the summer are suitable for promoting therapy. For those suffer-
ing from consumption, piles, disorders of grahaṇī and wasted by other (similar) dis-
eases, the light meat-soup of carnivorous animals is the best promoting one. Bath,
annointing, sleep, enema with sweet and unctuous substances, sugar, milk and ghee
are universal promoters. [25-28]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on roughening therapy]

Roughening therapy consists of the regular intake of pungent, bitter and
astringent articles, sexual acts and use of oil-cakes, buttermilk and honey etc. The
roughening therapy is indicated in the diseases which are caused by blocking of
channels, strong doṣas and are located in vital parts and in ūrustambha (stiffness of
thighs) etc. Unction, persons suitable for unction, sweating and persons suitable for
sweating have been explained earlier in detail in the concerned chapters. [29-34]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on checking therapy]

All the drugs and measures consisting of liquid, thin, stable, cooling and having
sweet, bitter and astringent tastes constitute the checking therapy. It is indicated in
pitta, burns with alkali and fire, vomiting, diarrhoea, excessive application of poisons
and sweating. [32-33]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on symptoms of properly administered reducing]

The roughening therapy should be regarded as properly administered when
there is proper elimination of wind, urine and faeces, lightness in body, cleansing of
heart, eructation, throat and mouth, disappearance of drowsiness and exhaustion,
appearance of sweat, relish and both hunger and thirst together, and also the feeling
of well-being. Pain in joints, body-ache, cough, dryness of mouth, loss of hunger,
