SŪTRASTHĀNA                                                                    155

फनीहा पायङ्गुनामः शोको मूञ्छकुक्करोचकः । इदरोगो राजयक्ष्मा च कासः श्वासो गलग्रहः ॥ १२३॥
क्लिनयो श्रवणीदोषाः श्रीयं स्वीत्यभवतीत च । व्रणगो दीपते वाधिः स्मृतिवृद्विश्च वश्ते ॥ १२४॥
व्यायामनित्यो जीवोशी यत्रयोनमुभोजनः । संपण्यतूसीदोषः स्वीयं पुनत्व विमुग्यते ॥ ११२५॥

For this, emesis, purgation, blood-letting, physical exercise, fasting, smoking,
sweating, use of abhayāprāśa (a preparation of harītakī) with honey, rough food
grains and powder-annointment indicated in itching, patches etc. (in ch. III) are rec-
ommended.

Triphalā, āragvadha, pāṭhā, saptaparṇa, kuṭaja, musta, madana and nimba–
these should be decocted in water. By regular use of this decoction according to
dose and time diseases caused by oversaturation like diabetes etc. are alleviated cer-
tainly.

Musta, āragvadha, pāṭhā, triphalā, devadāru, gokṣura, khadira, nimba, both types
of haridrā (haridrā and dāruharidrā), and bark of kuṭaja–by using the decoction of
these drugs in the morning according to doṣa one is relieved of all the diseases caused
by over-saturation.

These very drugs applied in the form of annointings, rubbings, baths and also
mixed with uncting substances alleviate the skin disorders.

Kuṣṭha, gomedaka (onyx), hiṅgu, bone of krauñca (a bird), trikatu, vacā, vāsa,
elā, gokṣura, yavānī and pāṣāṇabhedā–the powder of these drugs taken alongwith but-
ter-milk, curd-water, or sour jujube juice alleviates dysuria and prameha.

Prameha etc. get alleviated by the administration of buttermilk with harītakī
triphalā and ariṣṭa (a fermented preparation). Trikatu, triphalā, honey, vidaṅga, ajamodā
are mixed with roasted grain flour and mantha (churned drink like lassi) is prepared
adding some oil and decoction of aguru. This is beneficial (in prameha etc.)

Trikatu, vidaṅga, seeds of śigru, triphalā, katukā, two types of bṛhatī (bṛhatī and
kaṇṭakārī), two types of haridrā, pāṭhā, ativiṣā, śālaparṇī, hiṅgu, roots of kebuka,
yavānī, dhānyaka, citraka, sauvarcala (a salt), jīraka–these should be powdered and
added with oil, ghee and honey each in quantity equal to the powder. All this is mixed
up with sixteen times of roasted grain flour and a saturating drink (mantha) is pre-
pared. By the use of this preparation the diseases caused by over-saturation like
prameha, disorders of flatus, leprosy, piles, jaundice, spleen (enlargement), anaemia,
swelling, dysuria, anorexia, heart disease, phthisis, cough, dyspnoea, choking of
throat, helminthiasis, disorders of grahaṇī, leocoderma, over obesity are alleviated,
the digestive power is stimulated and memory and intellect develop.
