XXIV]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               159

with therapies like cold-hot, unctuous-rough etc. should be taken as caused by
(impure) blood. [11-17]

कुर्याच्चिपित्तरोगेषु रक्तपित्तरीं क्रियाम् । विरेकोपवासं च स्नावणं शोणितस्य च ॥१८॥

In diseases caused by blood, one should adopt the treatment which evacuates
blood and pitta such as purgation, fasting and blood-letting. [18]

बलदोषप्रमाणाद्धि विशुद्धा कथितस्त वा । शरिरं स्नावयेज्जन्तोराशयं समीक्ष्य च ॥१९॥

Blood should be evacuated keeping in view the measure of strength and doṣa,
purification of blood and also the location. [19]

अरुणभं भवेद्वातिकं केसिनं तनु । पित्तात् पीताभं रक्तं स्त्रायूभिभिश्चाविरोधम् ॥२०॥
ईषद्बाणु कफाजुरुचिं तनुमूढमम् । संसृष्टेलिंग संसर्गाभिनिलिंगं सान्निपातिकम् ॥२१॥

Due to vāta, blood becomes reddish, non-slimy, frothy and thin. Due to pitta, it
becomes yellow or blackish, with delayed coagulation because of heat. Due to kapha
it is slightly pale, slimy, fibrous and viscous. In combination of dosas, it acquires
mixed up characters and in sannipāta, has symptoms of the three dosas. [20-21]

तपनीयेन्द्रगोपयोः पद्यालक्तकसदृशम् । शुद्धकालसरं विशुद्धं विद्धि शोणितम् ॥२२॥

Blood should be regarded as pure when it has colour like that of gold and firefly,
red lotus, lac juice and guñjā fruit. [22]

नातुणाशीतं लघु दीपनीयं रक्तसेमनीते हितम्भवणम् ।
तत् शरीरं क्षायविसायमुपत्रिशेणं च रक्षिणेत् ॥२३॥

After blood-letting not too hot and cold, light, and appetising food and drinks
are beneficial. During that period, the body has unstable blood so the agni should be
protected with care. [23]

प्रसन्नवर्णेन्द्रियमनोनिग्नमनाहबयफवगेणम् ।
सुजानितं तुपूष्टिजलोपयश विशुद्धसरं पुरुषं वदेति ॥२४॥

A person should be considered as having pure blood if his complexion and sense
organs are cheerful, there is normal inclination towards sense objects, the digestion
and natural urges are unobstructed, he is happy and endowed with saturation and
strength. [24]

यदा तु रक्ताशीतं रसमंसावहानि च । पृषकं-पृषक् समता सो शोणितं कुपितं मलाः ॥१२५॥
मलिनाहारशीलस्य रोगोगोहोशिताभेषजे । प्रहियाबतिष्ठासे जायते व्याधयः सदा ॥१२६॥
नवमूत्रकूनसंसर्गलेशेन विकाशिभिक्षाः । यथोसरे बतिनियेभ्यो हेतुलिंगोपशांचिनि ॥१२७॥
दुर्बलं चेतस: स्मारं द्वा वायु: प्रधतं । दत्ते संयोगमेतेषाम् ॥१२८॥
पित्तमेयं कफश्चैव मनो विक्षीभावयुणाम् । सर्भा नत्याकुलतां विशेषेण भक्षते ॥१२९॥
