160                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

When in a person indulged in dirty food and having himself covered with rajas
and tamas, the vitiated doṣas, singly or in combination, obstruct the channels carrying
rakta, rasa and consciousness and are located there, they give rise to diseases–mada
(narcosis), mūrcchā (fainting) and saṃnyāsa (coma). [25-29]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on mada, mūrcchā etc.]

The person should be diagnosed as a case of vātika mada, if his speech is adher-
ent, excessive and fast, movement is unstable and falling, and face is rough, reddish
or blackish. The person with angry and harsh speech, inclination towards beating and
quarrels, and red, yellow and black face should be known as a case of paittika mada.
The one afflicted with kaphaja mada has little and incoherent speech, drowsiness
and lassitude, paleness and continued concentration. In sannipātaja mada, all these
features are found. [30-32]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on alcoholic narcosis]

This narcosis arises and subsides quickly like the alcoholic narcosis. [33]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on narcosis]

All types of narcosis–caused by alcoholic drinks, poisons or blood–are not except
(the vitiation of) the three (doṣas) vāta, pitta and kapha. [34]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on mūrcchā]

In vātika mūrcchā, the patient becomes unconscious seeing the sky as blue, black or
reddish and recovers quickly. Other symptoms are trembling, body-ache, excessive pain in
cardiac region, emaciation, blackish and reddish lustre. In paittika mūrcchā, unconsciousness
comes after seeing the sky as red, green or yellow and recovery is with sweating. There are
also symptoms like thirst, pyrexia, red or yellow disturbed eyes, loose motions and
yellow face. The patient of kaphaja mūrcchā, gets unconscious after seeing the sky like
clouds or covered with deep darkness and recovers after a long time. He feels his body
parts heavy and as wrapped with wet hide. He also suffers from excessive salivation
and nausea. Sannipātaja mūrcchā has got the characters of all the above types
