XXIV] SŪTRASTHĀNA 161

and attacks in paroxysm like epilepsy with the difference that in this (mūrcchā) the
patient falls down without disgusting movement. [35-41]

दोषेषु मदमूर्च्छाः क्वलतेगेषु देहिनाम् । स्वयमेवोपशाम्यन्ति सन्यासो नीषधीविनः ॥४२॥
वायुदेहनरति चेतांसंवाक्प्रणयिता मलः । सन्नायनत्ववलं जन्तु प्राणायतनसंश्रितः ।
स नं सन्नाससंत्रस्तः काष्ठीभूतो मृतोपमः । वाणिष्टाल्पकं शीघ्र मृत्यता सदःकाला क्रियाः ।।४४।।
दुर्गेऽम्भसि यथा भजड़ानां स्रष्टा शुक् । मृद्वीयालोप्तमाणमर्थ तथा सन्यासचिकित्सकः ।।४५।।
अञ्चनान्ययतीक्ष्णं धूमः प्रधमनानि च । मूर्धिभितीर्णं सालं दाहः पीडा नखझारैः ॥४६॥
छुपनं केशलोमाश् च दन्तैर्दानने व च । आत्मगुप्ताफलई त्रिति सत्यालकत्थने ।
संयुक्तिजानि तीक्ष्णानि मद्यानि विदधानि च । प्रत्यल्क्दूरधानि तत्यायर्थ पालनेनाभुः ।।४७।।
मातुलुङ्गरस माद्वीसंयुक्तशुण्ठ्यम् । तत्यलीयवलं दलापुर्धं महाविस्वादकालिकैः ।
हिङ्गुलवणसामयुक्त यावद् संज्ञाप्रलोभनम् । प्रकुक्तिरप्रतेछ शणुभिस्तत्यमुपयोर्जे ।।५०।।
विमापानैः स्मारयेच्चे प्रियपुत्रमित्रेश व । एद्यभिगर्जितावेद्यश्लक्ष्णवीर्यमेत द्रश्मिः ।।
सन्तोपलेखवीणातीर्त्रितः कवलाभिः । योगिनासायावयोकेक्ष्ये भ्यामानोपचर्जताश्च ।।५२।।
प्रधूतकेर्वयैमत्र्यं कवलश्च । तथ सर्वदेहस्य च मन प्रसङ्गवेदतुः ।।५३।।

Mada and mūrcchā subside on their own accord when the doṣas finish their
attack but saṁnyāsa (coma) does not subside without medicines.

In weak persons, when very strong doṣas get located in the abode of vital breath
(heart) and affect the movement of speech, body and mind, coma ensues. The person
affected with coma looks stick-like and as dead and immediately succumbs to death
if the emergency is not managed quickly. As a wise person brings out the utensil
drowning in deep water quickly before it settles down (in bottom) (the physician
should manage), the patient suffering from coma.

For arousing him (from the deep slumber), collyriums, drops, smokes, blowing,
needling, burning, pain in nail bed, plucking the hairs of head and body, biting with
teeth, rubbing with hairy fruits of ātmaguptā are useful. Besides, various types of
strong alcoholic liquors added with plenty of pungent substances should be poured
into his mouth frequently. Similarly, the juice of mātuluṅga added with dry ginger
and sauvarcala (salt) combined with hiṅgu alongwith wine, sour juice or vinegar should
be administered for arousing consciousness.

When the patient regains consiousness he should be given light diet and during
this period he should be entertained with surprising narratives, memoirs, pleasing
talks, enchanting songs and playing of musical instruments and colourful scenery.
Moreover, he should be treated with purgation, emesis, smoking, collyrium, gargles,
blood-letting and rubbing over the body. Thus his mind should be protected well
from the causes of destruction. [42-53]

26 C. S. - I
