XXV]                                    SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    165

    Kāṅkāyana said–'No, (this is not so) because in that case there can't be any initiation (of action) and its results and the accomplishment or otherwise of the objects would be by nature itself. Hence (in my view), Prajāpati, the descendant of Brahmā and having unlimited determination, is the creator of the world-sentient and insentient-as well as pleasure and pain. [22-23]

तत्रेति मिथुस्तत्रेतो न काम्यमं प्रजापतिः । प्रजाहितेषी सततं दुःखेषूपमादयामणुः ।।२४।।
कालजनिसेव पुरुषः कालजातस्य चातयाः । जगत् कालवशं सर्वं कालः सर्वं कारणम् ।।२५।।

    (On this) Ātreya, the mendicant, said–'No, (this is not so) because as Prajāpati, being the well-wisher of his progeny, could not subject it constantly to painful situations like an unkind man. (Hence in my view) person is the product of Kāla (the time factor) and so are his diseases. The entire universe is governed by time which is the universal cause. [24-25]

तथयोनिषां विवदमानुयात्वेषु पुनर्वसुः । मैत्रं योजयत तत्वं हि दुःखाय यहसंग्रहम् ।।२६।।
यादात्र स्वमतिनाञ्चि सिद्धान्तिनः। पद्भ्यानां वे गण्यान विलिप्तिकन्तदूतिताः ।।२७।।
तृतयेव च वादस्तेव संग्रहयेन्तरम् । तावतो भि तमःस्खेदो ज्ञानं प्रति न ।।२८।।
वेषयोनिर्हि यावानसं संग्रहयेन्तरम् । तेषयोनि विचित्याथो विचित्याथोविचित्यनुपायदीपेन ।।२९।।

    When the sages were debating like this, Punarvasu said–'Do not speak so because by adherence to a side the reality can be attained only with difficulty. Those placing their views as well as their refutations as decided facts can not reach the end of the controversy like an oil presser in the (cyclic) movement. Hence leave this confrontation of views and think over the reality because until unless the covering of the mass of tamas from the object is removed, the knowledge would not come forth. (the conclusion of the real position is that) the entities, which in suitable state, generate person, can cause the various disorders in unsuitable state. [26-29]

अथाप्तेश्य भगवतो वत्सनुनिशम्य पुनरेव वामकः काशिपतिरथा भगवन्नाप्ते–भगवन् संषिचिविषयस्य पुरुषस्य विषिचिचिमज्ञानां च रोगाणां विषिचिचिकारणमिति ।।३०।।

    Having listened to Lord Atreya, Vāmaka, the king of Kāśi, again put the query to him–'Sir, what is the cause of development of person by the suitability (of factors) and the diseases produced by the unsuitability (of the same). [30]

तमुवाच भगवानात्रेयः–हिताहारोयोगं एक एव पुरुषवृद्धिकरो भवति, अहिताहारोयोगः पुनरुव्याधिनिमित्तमिति ।।३१।।

    Lord Atreya said to him–'Only the use of wholesome food promotes the growth of person and that of unwholesome one is the cause of disorders. [31]
