178                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Those predominant in properties of light, cold, rough, coarse, non-slimy, minute
and touch are vāyavya (constituted predominantly by vāyu bhūta). They produce
actions of roughness, depression, movement, non-sliminess and lightness.

Dravyas having predominance in the properties of soft, light, minute, smooth
and sound are ākāśiya (constituted predominantly by ākāśa bhūta). They exert actions
of softening, hollowing and lightness. [11]

अनेनोपदेशेन मानीषिभूपूर्ते तगति विधिचतुरुपयुपलम्भयते तां सो पुलिकमर्यं च तं तमभिप्रेत्य ।।१२।।

On this basis there is no substance in the universe which can not be used as drug
on the condition that they are used rationally and with a definite objective [12]

न तु केवलं गुणप्रभावादेव द्रव्याणि कर्माणि भवन्ति; द्रव्याणि हि द्रव्यप्रभावादगुणप्रभावादुभयगुण-
भावाच्च तस्मिन्नेतेषिन् काले तदधिकरणकालाश्च तां सां च पुलिकमर्यं च तं तमभिप्रेत्य यत् कुर्विते, तत् कर्म;
येन कुर्विते, तदिर्य; यत् कुर्विते, तदधिकरणं; यदा कुर्विते, स कालः; यथा कुर्विते, स उपायः; यत् साधयति,
यत् फलम् ।।१३।।

The drugs are active not only due to propeties but also due to their own intrinsic
composition, properties and both combined together in particular time, on reaching a
particular locus, with a particular mechanism and objective. What they perform is
karma (action), by means of which they act is vīrya (potency), where they act is
adhikarana (locus of action), when they act is kāla (time), how they act is upāya (mecha-
nism) and what they achieve is result. [13]

भेद्धेयी त्रिविधविविधिकल्पानो द्रव्येदेशकालगम्भावलक्षिते, त्रणुपदेशाय: ।।१४।।

There are sixty three types of variations of rasas according to substance, place
and time, that is mentioned (below). [14]

स्वादुस्वादुलियांयाँ शेरैरासवादः; पृथक् । पानि पञ्चदीतानि द्रव्याणि हिरसति तु ।।१५।।
पूरगम्लादिद्युत्तस्य यौगः श्रेयः पृथग्भवत् । मधुरस तथाऽऽलंसय लघवस्य काटिनया ।।१६।।
त्रिरसानि पञ्चदशानि संकृत्ति विरसिति; । पत्संग्रं तु चतुर्याणो द्रव्याणि विश वस्थ ।।१७।।
स्वाद्यौरी संहितो मेलं तथाणौति; पूर्यसंतो श्रेः प्रथाभावशदुत्कासाखन्येषाम् ।।१८।।
संहिती स्वाद्युपायो तथत् अष्टावित्तिस्मिः; पृथकी श्रेयः स्वाद्युपायो लयाः स्वाद्युपृथ्या ।।१९।।
कटुत्वारशलवणामु संकृतो संहितो पृथक् । पातः प्रथयमो श्रेयः शेरैरनस्यक् तथा ।।२०।।
सुत्वते तु संकणित्ये संहितो लिगणायो। । यत् तु पञ्चगम्भावलांकृसिविधिद्रव्याणाँ विविद्धि रससंख्यया ।।२१।।

By combination of two rasas such as madhura with amla etc. and amla with
others, there are fifteen dravyas. Likewise, by combination of three rasas toge-
ther, there are twenty substances. By combination of four rasas together there
is fifteen substances such as sweet and sour get combined separately with two of
