180                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

rateness), parimāna (measurement), saṃskāra (processing) and abhyāsa (practice)–
these properties are known as 'parādi' (beginning with para). They are the means of
success (in treatment). I am explaining them with definitions.

  Paratva and aparatva are used in relation to place, time, age, measure, vipāka,
vīrya, rasa etc.

  Yukti is the rational planning (of therapeutic measures). Saṅkhyā is mathematics
(including statistics).

  Joining together (of entities) is samyoga. This is of three types according to the
active participation of both, all or one partner. It is non-eternal.

  Vibhāga is also of three types– vibhakti (excision), viyoga (disjoining) and
bhāgaśo graha (division).

  Pṛthaktva is of three types– asamyoga (spatial and temporal separateness),
vailakṣaṇya (class separateness) and anekatā (individual separateness).

  Parimāna denotes measures (of all types– including weights).

  Saṃskāra is processing.

  Abhyāsa is regular use of substance, habituation and  practice.

  Thus all the parādi properties are said with their definitions, which if unknown,
do not let the therapy proceed properly. [29-35]

गुण गुणाक्षा नोकालत्म्याद्रगुणान् विभजः । विद्याद्व्यगुणान् कार्यरिप्रभात्ः प्रचिन्तयन्॥ ॥३६॥

  Properties are not said as located in properties (themselves). Hence a physician
should take the properties of rasas as those of dravyas, (taking into account) the dif-
ferent intentions of the author. [36]

अतश्च प्रकृतं बुध्या देशकालतत्वानि च । तत्कर्तृभिप्राययानुयायार्थान् पश्चार्थविदोत् ॥ ॥३७॥

  Hence one should decide the meaning after knowing the context, the factors like
place and time, author's intentions and the scriptural methods. [37]

षड्भिभूतैभवेः प्रच्यथानि उत्तरम् । षट् पञ्चभूतसम्भवाः संभवाभश्च चया रसाः ॥ ॥३८॥

  Hereafter, (I) will tell about the six divisions of rasa and also as the rasas are
originated from the five bhūtas. [38]

सोम्याः खल्वयोऽनिरावभास्याः प्रकृतिसिलक्ष्यभावकाराणांः, तात्वतलनिरीक्षाभूभश्यमाना प्रावश्व पञ्चभूत-
गुणसम्निवेशः अनुभवस्यराणां भूतानां गुणतिरिभभोभयतिः, मधु मूर्तिषु बहुमूर्त्तिकुण्टिते रसाः ॥ ॥३९॥

  Water (ap), generated in sky, naturally cold,
light and having unmanifested rasas. While falling from the sky, gets endowed
with the properties of five bhūtas and thus dropped (on the ground) nourishes the
physical forms of animals and plants. In these six rasas are evolved. [39]
