XXVI]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  185

In case where vīrya and vipāka are in conformity with rasa, the properties are
known by the rasa itself as in cases of milk, ghee, (madhura-śita) and cavya-citraka
(katu-uṣṇa). In such other cases too, the physician should know (the properties) on
the basis of rasa. [46-47]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on exceptions to vīrya rule]

(There are certain exceptions to this)–some substances, though madhura, kaṣāya
and tikta in rasa, are uṣṇa in vīrya such as bigger five roots and meat of aquatic and
marshy animals. The rocksalt, though being lavaṇa, is not uṣṇa (in vīrya) and so is
āmalaka which is amla in rasa. Arka, aguru and guḍūcī are tikta (in rasa) but uṣṇa (in
vīrya). [48-49]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on amla rasa exceptions]

(Likewise, there are also variations in actions of rasa.) Some substance of amla
rasa is astringent while other is purgative such as kapittha comes in the former while
āmalaka in the latter group. Kaṭu rasa is non-aphrodisiac but pippalī and śuṇṭhī (though
katurasa) are aphrodisiac. Kaṣāya rasa is checking and cold but harītakī (though kaṣāya)
is laxative and hot. Hence only on the basis of rasa, one can not prescribe all the
substances when even in substances of similar rasa, difference in properties is ob-
served in individual cases. [50-52]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on rasa quantitative comparisons]

(From the point of view of six prominent guṇas, the rasas have been positioned
in three degrees). Considering roughness, kaṣāya comes in the highest degree, kaṭu in
the medium degree and tikta in the lowest degree. Considering hotness, lavaṇa comes
on the top, amla in the middle, kaṭuka on the bottom. From the point of view of
unctuousness, madhura is in the highest degree, amla in the middle and lavaṇa in the
lowest one. Considering coldness, madhura, kaṣāya and tikta come in order of
superiority. Considering heaviness, madhura comes in the highest degree, kaṣāya in
the middle and lavaṇa in the lowest one. Considering lightness, tikta comes on the
top, then kaṭu and lastly amla. Some take lavaṇa as the inferior one in the category
light rasas. Thus lavaṇa is placed in the lowest order considering both heaviness and
lightness. [53-56]

29 C.S.-I
