XXVII                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                185

    In case where vīrya and vipāka are in conformity with rasa, the properties are
known by the rasa itself as in cases of milk, ghee, (madhura-sita) and cavya-citraka
(katu-uṣṇa). In such other cases too, the physician should know (the properties) on
the basis of rasa. [46-47]

यषूँ किञ्चिद्गुणं स्यात् कथंचि विशेषेण वा । यथा महाशृङ्गाणं याण्डभक्षाणुपायितेषम् ।।४८।।
लवणं सैन्धवं नोष्णायत्तमणलकं तथा । अर्कागुरुगुच्चीनां तिक्तत्वमुष्णमुष्णता ।।४९।।

    (There are certain exceptions to this)– some substances, though madhura, kaṣāya
and tikta in rasa, are uṣṇa in vīrya such as bigger five roots and meat of aquatic and
marshy animals. The rock salt, though being lavaṇa, is not uṣṇa (in vīrya) and so is
āmalaka which is amla in rasa. Arka, aguru and guduci are tikta (in rasa) but uṣṇa (in
vīrya). [48-49]

किञ्चित् हि संगृहि किञ्चित्स्त्री भिवति च । यथा कपित्थं संगृहि मेचे चायलकं ।।५०।।
पिप्पली गंगर शुभ्रं कटु वाशुषोद्भवते । कषाय: सम्भवः गौरी: सो: षयचायलागो: ॥५१।।
तस्मान्सतोद्देशेन च सर्वं द्रव्यमादिशेत् । दृष्ट तुल्यरसेऽप्येवं द्रव्ये द्रव्ये गुणान्तरम् ।।५२।।

    (Likewise, there are also variations in actions of rasa). Some substance of amla
rasa is astringent while other is purgative such as kapittha comes in the former while
āmalaka in the latter group. Kaṭu rasa is non-aphrodisiac but pippali and śuṇṭhi (though
katurasa) are aphrodisiac. Kaṣāya rasa is checking and cold but harītakī (though kaṣāya)
is laxative and hot. Hence only on the basis of rasa, one can not prescribe all the
substances when even in substances of similar rasa, difference in properties is ob-
served in individual cases. [50-52]

रौक्ष्यगु क्षाचारो क्षमागुणेयो यथम: कटुः । तित्तोद्देशरुपतोगुणागुतमुपायलागः ।।५३।।
मध्योऽम्लः कटुकाह्वाद्वः निम्नयानो गुरुः परः । मध्योऽद्विसरो लयातिलकाः रसः स्नेहविरतस्ते ।।५४।।
मध्योऽक्षयाः शीतेणो कयाचद्वातलिकाः: । स्वादुर्लघुस्वभातिकः कषायकाललागोद्वः ।।५५।।
अम्बाण मृदुवानिलिको लयाणुपोग: । केचिकण्डुगुरागानि शीतलावणं लवणं रसम् ।।५६।।
गौरेव लावणे चैव सेऽन्नुबलगुणोपरि ।

    (From the point of view of six prominent guṇas, the rasas have been positioned
in three degrees). Considering roughness, kaṣāya comes in the highest degree, kaṭu in
the medium degree and tikta in the lowest degree. Considering hotness, lavaṇa comes
on the top, amla in the middle, kaṭuka on the bottom. From the point of view of
unctuousness, madhura is in the highest degree, amla in the middle and lavaṇa in
the lowest one. Considering coldness, madhura, kaṣāya and tikta come in order of
superiority. Considering heaviness, madhura comes in the highest degree, kaṣāya in
the middle and lavaṇa in the lowest degree. Considering lightness, tikta comes on the
top, then kaṭu and lastly amla. Some take lavaṇa as the inferior one in the category
light rasas. Thus lavaṇa is placed in the lowest order considering both heaviness and
lightness. [53-56]

29 C.S.-I
