XXVI]                         SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  187

(For instance) citraka is kaṭu in rasa and vipāka and uṣṇa in vīrya; similar is dantī
but the latter is purgative (while the former is not). Poison acts as antidote to poison,
here also the cause is prabhāva. Likewise, the action of ūrdhva-bhāgahara (emetics)
and anulomika (purgatives) is due to prabhāva. Various effects of gems wearable (on
the body) is also due to prabhāva. Thus prabhāva is unthinkable. Thus vipāka, vīrya
and prabhāva are explained well. Some drugs acts by (means of rasa), other by vīrya
and other by guṇa, vipāka or prabhāva. In case of equality of strength, vipāka subdues
rasa, vīrya subdues both, and prabhāva all these three. These are the natural relative
degrees of strength. [68-72]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on madhura rasa effects]

Hereafter, (I) will describe the characters of six rasas. Madhura rasa is known by
(its actions)– unction, saturation, exhilaration and softening. While in mouth, it per-
vades and as if makes a coating there. If, after putting in mouth, there is sensitisation
of teeth, salivation, sweating, awakening of mouth (gustatory sensations) and burning
in mouth and throat, that should be labelled as amla rasa. Lavaṇa rasa is dissolved
quickly and produces moistening, watering, softening and burning in mouth. That
which, on contact, irritates and produces piercing pain in tounge and stimulates secre-
tions with burning from mouth, nose and eyes is pungent. That which, on contact with
tongue, destroys all other gustatory perceptions so that no other taste is perceived;
and also gives rise to non-sliminess and dryness in mouth, alongwith cheerfulness, is
tikta (rasa). Kaṣāya is that which produces non-sliminess, stiffness and coldness in
tongue, as if choking the throat and is also depressent. [73-79]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Agniveśa's question on dravya, guṇa and karma]

Hereafter, (I) will describe the characters of six rasas. Madhura rasa is known by
(its actions)– unction, saturation, exhilaration and softening. While in mouth, it per-
vades and as if makes a coating there. [80]
