XXVIJ                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                               187

कटुकः कट्कः पाके वीयोपाहिग्को मत् । तद्रतनी प्रभावातु विरिचयति मारसम् ।।६८।।
विवं विषमुपुर्फे यत् प्रभावतस्त्र कारणम् । कुष्ठानुलोगिके चक्ष तत् प्रभावप्रभावितम् ।।९९।।
मणीना धारणीयानां कर्म यद्विशेषणात्पकम् । तत् प्रभावकृते वर्षां प्रभावाऽविशित उत्क्षति ।।७०।।
सम्यगिपाकवीर्यायि प्रभावाद्यथादृहानः । किलिकहेतवे कुर्वते कार्यं वीपेण बायरम् ।।७१।।
द्रव्यं पूर्वेण पाकेन प्रभावेण च किकत । रत विपाकांतरी वीर्यं प्रभावास्तन्योपहिते ।।७२।।
बलायासा रसादीयानामेते नैसरिग्का बलम् ।

(For instance) citraka is kaṭu in rasa and vipāka and uṣṇa in vīrya; similar is daṃti
but the latter is purgative (while the former is not). Poison acts as antidote to poison,
here also the cause is prabhāva. Likewise, the action of ūrdhva-bhāgahara (emetics)
and ānulomika (purgatives) is due to prabhāva. Various effects of gems wearable (on
the body) is also due to prabhāva, their prabhāva is unthinkable. Thus vipāka, vīrya
and prabhāva are explained well. Some drugs act by (means of rasa), other by vīrya
and other by guṇa, vipāka or prabhāva. In case of equality of strength, vipāka subdues
rasa, vīrya subdues both, and prabhāva all these three. These are the natural relative
degrees of strength. [68-72]

षण्णं रसानां विशेषमुपवेक्ष्यामः यरम् ।।७३।।
स्नेहनयोगुप्ताद्यमानाद्विधपतस्त्रभः । मुखस्थो मुखत्याश्यों व्याहुल्लिगभातीय च ।।७४।।
दन्तहर्षमुखास्रावतः स्वेदनासनेजनकुले दृखे । यः शीणं लवणो हेषः स विद्वानमुखस्य च ।।७५।।
प्रलीयन् क्लेदनविदान्नार्दन कुलते हृखे । यः शीणं लवणो हेषः स विद्वानमुखस्य च ।।७६।।
संवेजयंश्चो रसानां निपुणे तृतीये च । विदहन्मुखनासादीनिर्जुनं संसाधते च सकटु: स्यात् ।।७७।।
प्रहिणिते तिपाते यो रसनं हरदते न च । स तिलको मुखविशेलाग्राण्यहङ्कारकाः ।।७८।।
वैशद्यस्तम्भापकोशादो रोहेर्जेदयः च यः कार्षं कषायः स विकास्त्यपि ।।७९।।

Hereafter, (I) will describe the characters of six rasas. Madhura rasa is known by
(its actions)- unction, saturation, exhilaration and softening. While in mouth, it per-
vades and as if makes a coating there. If, after putting in mouth, there is sensitisation
of teeth, salivation, sweating, awakening of mouth (gustatory sensations) and burning
in mouth and throat, that should be labelled as amla rasa. Lavaṇa rasa is dissolved
quickly and produces moistening, watering, softening and burning in mouth. That
which, on contact, irritates and produces piercing pain in tonuge and stimulates secre-
tions with burning from mouth, nose and eyes is pungent. That which, on contact with
tongue, destroys all other gustatory perceptions so that no other taste is perceived;
and also gives rise to non-sliminess and dryness in mouth, alongwith cheerfulness, is
tikta (rasa). Kaṣāya is that which produces non-sliminess, stiffness and coldness in
tongue, as if choking the throat and is also depressant. [73-79]

एतद्भुक्वान भगवानग्निवेशपान्विप्रोक्त उत्तर— भगवन् शुभेगेविवधयवयंस्युमुखे भगवानु यत्वाद्यत्वानुगकाभिधिकारे
यतः; परं लाहारविकारणां वैदिकिकानां लक्षणमतिसंक्षेपेणोपदेश्यानां शुशुभूषाणं इति ।।८०।।
