XXVII                                    SŪTRASTHĀNA                                    189

नहोयोऽयं वैरोचिकलवालू । तथा ऽ ऽ प्राप्ताकमायुरुष्णनिकुष्करमर्दीषद्वनाताठवटर्कोशग्रम्भव्याजम्बाकवित्पतिनिलीकधारा-
वाक्षोत्प्रमसचालिलर्दादिफ़ामलकान्येतेडक्राणि धान्यानि द्रव्याणि सर्वं चालनं द्रवमद्रवं च पयसा सह विरुद्धम् ।
तथा कण्गुवनकमकुष्टकलत्तमनिष्पावाः पयसा सह विरुद्धाः । ए पद्मोत्तरिकाशर्करं शार्करी रैरेचो मधु च
सहोपयुक्तं विटतां वातं धातिकोयति । हारिटकः सर्षपतैलेण विद्धः पित्तं धातिकोयति । पायसं मन्थानुपानो
सिद्धः निलेश्मणं धातिकोयति । उपोटिका तिलकल्कसिद्धा ईद्रुतिशास्त्रस्य । मललका बालका सह श्रुणमूत्रेण
सिद्धः सैव शूकरलवालपुष्पा मधो व्यावयति । मत्युरोशमशेषतिलकल्कसात्मर्षशर्पण्यूर्षविकृत्यूर्षत्रिकट्ट मधो व्यावयति ।
हारिटकमुलं हारिटकीफलकसह हारिटकिभिश्रुतं मधो व्यावयति; तदेव मन्मयांशुपिरसकल सध्वीः मधो मत्यान ।
मात्स्थपिततन्तिसिलंः किमायकवाकममुखे मधु च मत्याणः । मधु चोण्मचमातित्रस्य च मधु मत्याणः । मचुमरिणी
तन्दुलं, मधु मारि चान्ठिरेच सम्पुष्ट, मधु मुखर्यनीच, मधु पीलीचोपाशेक, भलन्तकोपाशेक, तमालिसः; कम्पिलकः,
पचिनीत काफकली, अगरुनूपलो भारगावित विरुद्धानि । इत्येवमाचार्यविपिहर्षितिः भावधीतिः ।। ८XI ।।

'No'-said Lord Ātreya. One should not take any fish alongwith milk particularly
cilacima because it, being great obstructor of channels, produces these disorders with
gross symptoms and also excites āmavisa. Meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic ani-
mals should not be taken mixed with honey, sesamum, jaggery, milk, black gram,
radish, lotus stalk or germinated grains because it causes deafness, blindness,
tremors, coldness, indistinct voice, nasal voice or death. The potherb of puṣkara or
rohiṇī or (meat of) pigeon fried with mustard oil should not be taken alongwith honey
and milk because it causes obstruction in blood-circulation, athero-sclerosis, epilepsy,
śaṅkhaka, goitre, rohiṇī or death. After eating radish, garlic, śigru, arjaka, tulasī
etc. one should not take milk because of the risk of leprosy. The potherb of jātuka
or ripe (fruit of) nikuca should not be taken alongwith honey and milk as it causes
death, or loss of strength, lustre, energy and prowess; severe diseases and impotency.
The same ripe (fruit of) nikuca should not be taken with black gram, pulse, jaggery
and ghee because they are antagonistic. Likewise, āmra, āmrātaka, mātuluṅga, nikuça,
karamarda, moca, dantaśaṭha, badara, koṣāmra, bhavya, jambu, nārikela, dāḍima,
āmalaka–these fruits and similar other substances, all sour liquids or non-liquids
are antagonistic to milk. Kaṅgu, vanaka, makuṣṭhaka, kulattha, black gram and
niṣpāva are antagonistic to milk. The potherb of padmottarikā (kusumha), śārkara
and maireya (types of wine) and madhu, all used together are antagonistic and
vitiate vāta too much. Hāridraka (a bird) fried with mustard oil is antagonistic
and vitiates pitta too much. Pāyasa (rice cooked with milk) taken with after drink
of mantha (a drink prepared from roasted grain flour) is antagonistic and vitiates
kapha too much. Upoḍikā (a pot-herb) cooked with sesamum paste causes diarrhoea.
(Meat of) balākā (crane) alongwith vāruṇī (a type of wine) or kulmāṣa (grains soaked
