सप्तविंशोऽध्यायः
CHAPTER XXVII

अष्टाितोऽष्णानिविधिमध्यायं व्याख्यास्यामः ।।१।।
Now (I) shall expound the chapter on the types of food and drinks. [1]

इति ह स्माह भगवानात्रेयः ।।१।।
As propounded by Lord Ātreya. [2]

ईश्वरगन्धरसस्पर्शाः विधिनिषिद्धानुसारेण प्राणिनां प्राणिजन्मकानां प्राणाभावाकृते कुशलाः, प्रत्यक्षफलदर्शनात्;
कट्टिन्धा भवन्तेः निलाति; तत् सत्सपुर्जतित, तच्छरीरात्पूथूबलवर्णनीद्रासाद्यकारं यथोत्सपुरोस्माम्, विपरीतमहिताय
संभवति ।।१।।

Food and drinks with desirable smell, taste and touch and having been taken according to prescribed method is said as vital strength by the experts on the basis of observing their results directly; because the condition of internal fire depends on their fuel. They produce energy in mind, constitution of dhātus, strength, complexion and clarity of sense organs, if properly taken, otherwise they become harmful. [3]

तत्समाविंशतिहीतान्कोनान्मर्यमपियविलेनोदेश्यन्योदेश् ।  तत् स्वभावात्दुद्धकं बलेद्यतित, स्वर्णं
विषदर्यति, छारः पाचयति, मांसं संग्राहति, मधि: स्नेहयति, मांसं जीवयति, मद्यं बृंहति, रत: शीथयति, सुरा
जरंकिरति, शौधुरात्मत्रि, शाशुरास्तं दीपयत, शालितलश्विनिषिति, दधि योग्य अजयति, पियाचकार्यं लच्छयति,
प्रभूतान्नलो पात्यमूत्र;  दुशिसुकारः  छारः, मायः पिलालम्बलस्तय दाड़िमालम्ककल्, मायः  झलेश्मलं  मधुरम्भत्वर
मधुर; मधुरम्भत्वर कृष्णतिलकल्येर बहुमलप्रसादः, तिलोभक्ष्यो दृष्टिशुक्रनाशनं, मधुरं  पित्तप्रकोपमिदं वर्जयित्वा
दाडिमेभ्यो-मालककं शर्करात्मकमपि: मधुर-लेत्मभूयिष्ठं वर्जयित्वा मधुलवणमामलकबार्हि-शालि-यवम्
बिरत-कटुक; मायः  वातकोपनं-ब्रह्यश्चेत; प्रायाव्रतलिखिवत्पटोलपर्णाः ।।१।।

Hence for the knowledge of wholesome and unwholesome, the types of food and drinks are described in entirety, O Agniveśa!

By nature water moistens, salt causes oozing, alkali helps digestion, honey unites, ghee uncts, milk vitalises, meat promotes the bulk, meatsoup nourishes, wine deteriorates, sidhu (a fermented preparation) emaciates, drākṣāsava stimulates appetite, phānita accumulates, curd causes swelling, vegetable of tila paste causes malaise, the pulse of black gram produces abundance of internal excrement (faeces), alkali damages vision and semen, sour (substance) is mostly pitta-aggravating except pomegranates and āmalaka, sweet is mostly kapha-aggravating except honey and old sāli, ṣaṣṭika (rice), barley and wheat; bitter is mostly vāta-aggravating and non-aphrodisiac except the tip of veṭra, guḍūcī and paṭola leaves; pungent is mostly vāta-aggravating and non-aphrodisiac except long pepper and ginger. [4]

परसमी भर्तेसिभ्रेशेशाहारद्रव्याणपृथुथ्याख्यास्यामः ।।५।।

30 C.S.-I
