196                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Group of Śamīdhānya (legumes)

Mudga (green gram) is astringent-sweet, rough, cold, kaṭu-vipāka, light, non-slimy, alleviates kapha and pitta and is the best among the legumes used as pulses.

Māṣa (black gram) is aphrodisiac, excellent vāta-alleviating, unctuous, hot, sweet, heavy, strength-promoting, causing abundance of faeces and gives sexual potency.

Rājamāsa is laxative, relishing, alleviates kapha, semen and amlapitta (acid gastritis), is sweet, vāta-aggravating, rough, astringent, non-slimy and heavy.

Kulattha (horse gram) is hot, astringent, amlapāka, alleviates kapha, semen, and vāta, is constipating and beneficial for cough, hiccup, dyspnoea and piles.

Makuṣṭhaka is sweet, madhura pāka, constipating, rough, cold and useful in internal haemorrhage, fever etc.

Caṇaka (gram), masūra (lentils), khaṇḍika and hareṇu (pea) are light, cold, sweet, slightly astringent, roughening, beneficial for pitta and kapha and useful as pulses and pastes. Amongst them, masūra is constipating and kalāya is exceedingly vāta-aggravating.

Tila is unctuous, hot, sweet, bitter, astringent, pungent, benefecial for skin, hair, strength, alleviates vāta and aggravates kapha and pitta.

Various legumes are sweet, cold, heavy, strength-reducing and roughening They are fit to be taken alongwith some fatty substance by strong persons.

Śimbi is rough, astringent, aggravates vāta in bowels, is non-aphrodisiac, non-beneficial for eyes and digests with wind.

Āḍhaki aggravates vāta and alleviates kapha and pitta; avalguja (bākucī) and cakramarda alleviate kapha and vāta, niṣpāva aggravates vāta and pitta.

The fruits of kākāṇḍolā and kapikacchu are similar (in properties) to those of māṣa.

Thus the second group of legumes is said by the sage. [23-34]

अथ पंसवर्ग:–

गोखरासारिपृथ्वीपिसिंहर्षानः। यूको स्याप्तरक्षुड् बहुमागरमुषिकाः।।३५।।
लोपाकौ अजमूः; हंसो महाराज्यायसी। शारंगी मघहा भासी शृड्लीशुककुलिन्ताः।।३६।।
मृषिका कुरहेठिते तसका मुखपांशिः। वेन; श्वमधिकम्पउः काकाक: काकुलीमुषा।।३७।।
कृषिका पिचिलीतो भोगी गोष जालकाकाकीः। कदली नकुलः शाविदि मूषिकाः।।३८।।
सुमरकंखः; खरो महंदि गरयो गजः। न्यजूबरिक्षानुणु मृगः; सर्व उरुलसना।।३९।।
कूरिः कर्मिकौ मासः। सिंहमारिसंतीमिलः। शृड्लिकाशु-मिली-शुककुलिन्नाः।।४०।।
इति वारिशेषाः; प्रोक्ता वद्यत्वने वारिचारिणः। हंसः कौश्री बलका च बक: कारण्डव: प्लव:।।४१।।
