198                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Lāva (commonquail), vartīraka, vārtika, kapīñjala, cakora, upacakra, kukkubha, raktavarṇma–these are the 'Lāvādya' viṣkira birds (similar to common quail who eat while scattering the grains).

Now the other sub-group 'vartakādi' of viṣkira birds will be said. Vartaka (male bustard), vartikā (female bustard), peacock, tittira (partridge), cock, kaṅka, śārapada, indrābha, gonarda, girivartaka, krakara, avakara, vārāda–these are the gallinaceous animals in the second sub-group.

Śatapatra, bhrṅgarāja, koyaṣṭi, jīvañjīvaka, kairāta, kokila, atyūha, gopāputra, priyātmaja, laṭṭā, laṭṭa(tu)saka, babhru, vataḥā, ḍiṇḍimāṇaka, jaṭī, dundubhī, pākkāra, lohapṛṣṭha, kuliṅgaka, kapota (pigeon), śuka (parrot), sāranga, ciraṭī, kaṅku, yaṣṭika, sārikā, kālviṅka, caṭaka, aṅgāracūḍaka pārāvata (dove), paṇḍa (na) vīka–these are the birds known as pratuda (who eat while striking). [35-52]

प्रशा भूषयन्तीति प्रशासनीत संज्ञाः ।।५३।।
भूषणा विलिम्पनाद्यनूपा नूचसंज्ञाः । कले नियमासलता आलेपवर्जमलेकरः ।।५४।।
स्थलजा जाङ्गला प्रोक्ता मृग आलतासरी: । विदीर्णि विळ्ळितकारिति प्रादुः मृगवः स्मृताः ।।५५।।
मोनिराशितेय स्थेष मधुरे अभिजनविभि ।।

They are called as 'prasaha' because they eat by snatching. 'Bhūṣaya' are known so as they live in burrows. Likewise, 'ānūpa' are due to their habitat in marshy lands. 'Jalaja' are because they live in waters while 'jalecara' move on them but are born on land. 'Jāṅgala' animals live in forests. 'Viṣkira' birds eat while scattering and pratuda ones are pecker birds. These are the eight sources of meat. [53-55]

प्रशा भूषयानूपवारिज वारिचारिणः ।।५६।।
गुरुष्णातिस्नेहबहुला: । वृष्यः सरः साहारः काषपिचैव।।५७।।
हिता व्यायामनित्यष्ट नर दीप्ताग्नय ये । प्रशसा विषकिरेषु मांसं संशितिसंभि मिश्रू ।।५८।।
वातीणयिक्षाधाष प्राचोयनोदयसंधर्य:। लवाव्य विष्किरो मार्ग: प्राशा मृग्लमा मृगाः ।।५९।।
लायः शीतमधुरं लघु नृणाम्। विष्किरा सततत्ये हिता विषयति सो करानुगे ।।६०।।
विष्किरा प्रशासेयानां गुणैः ।

Prasaha, bhūṣaya, ānūpa, vārija and vāricāriṇaḥ are heavy, hot, sweet, promote strength and development, are aphrodisiac, alleviate vāta, aggravate kapha and pitta, and are useful for the persons taking regular physical exercise and having strong digestive power.

The meat of prasaha birds and birds who are carnivorous is useful for those suffering from chronic piles, grahaṇī doṣa and phthisis. The viṣkira birds of the lāvādi sub-group, pecker birds and forest-dweller animals are light, cold, sweet, slightly astringent and useful for the patients of sannipāta having preponderance of pitta, vāta in moderate degree and kapha in the lowest one. The viṣkira birds of the vartakādya sub-group are slightly inferior in properties to the prasaha animals and birds. [56-60]
