200                           CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                           [CH

heavy, hot, unctuous, sweet, promote voice, complexion and strength, are bulk-promoting, increase semen and alleviate vāta.

Cocks are unctuous, hot, aphrodisiac, bulk-promoting, voice-awakening, tonic, excellently alleviating vāta and are diaphoretic.

Partridge is heavy, hot and sweet. Its habitat being not too arid or too marshy, it alleviates three doṣas with predominance of vāta.

Grey partridge, because of coldness, sweetness and lightness, is beneficial for the disorders of pitta, kapha, rakta and those having mildness of vāta.

Common quail is astringent-sweet, light, stimulant of agni, alleviates sannipāta and is kaṭuvipāka.

Godhā (iguana) is madhura in vipāka, kaṣāya and kaṭu in rasa, alleviates vāta and pitta, is bulk-promoting and tonic.

Śāllaka is sweet sour (in rasa), kaṭu in vipāka, alleviates vāta, pitta and kapha and removes cough and dyspnoea.

The domestic pigeons are astringent, non-slimy, cold, alleviate internal haemorrhage and are madhura is vipāka. The wild pigeons are slightly lighter, cold, constipating and diminishing the (quantity of) urine.

The meat of the parrot is astringent-sour, rūkṣa (kaṭu) in vipāka, sītala, useful in phthisis, cough and wasting; constipating, light and appetiser.

Caṭaka (sparrow) is sweet, unctuous, promotes strength and semen, alleviates sannipāta, particularly vāta.

Hare is astringent, non-slimy, rough, cold, kaṭu vipāka, light, sweet and useful in sannipāta with mild vāta.

Ena (black buck) is madhura rasa, madhura vipāka, alleviates three doṣas, is wholesome, light, constipating, anti-diuretic and cold.

Pork is uncting, bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac, alleviates fatigue and vāta, promotes strength, relish in food and sweating, and is heavy.

Beef is useful in absolute vāta, chronic rhinitis, intermittent fevers, dry cough, fatigue. excessive agni and wasting of muscles.

Buffalow-meat is unctuous, hot, sweet, aphrodisiac, heavy and saturating. It produces firmness, bulk, courage and sleep.

Fishes are heavy, hot, sweet, tonic, bulk-promoting, vāta-alleviting, unctuous, aphrodisiac and has plenty of demerits. Among them, rohita, because of eating algae and grass and also avoidance of sleep, is appetiser, laghupāka (light in digestion) and strength-promoting.

Tortoise is useful for complexion, alleviate. vāta, is aphrodisiac, promotes vision and strength, is conducive to intellect and memory, wholesome and destroys phthisis.
