206                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                         [CH

    Pārāvata is of two types–cold, sweet and hot (sour). It is heavy and alleviates anorexia and increases agni.

    Kāśmarya fruit has only slight difference in properties from bhavya. Likewise, the sour tūda has slight difference in properties from paruṣaka.

    Taṅka is astringent-sweet, vāta-aggravating, heavy and cold.

    Kapittha, when unripe, is harmful for throat, antipoison, constipating and vāta-aggravating. The same, when ripe, due to sweet, sour, astringent (taste) and fragrance produces relish, alleviates doṣas, is antipoison, constipating and heavy.

    Bilwa, when ripe, is digested with difficulty, causes doṣas and flatus with foul smell. The same, when young, is unctuous, hot, sharp, appetiser and alleviates kapha and vāta.

    The young fruits of āmra (mango) cause internal haemorrhage, the mature ones aggravate pitta while the ripe ones alleviate vāyu and promote muscles, semen and strength.

    The fruits of jambu are predominantly astringent-sweet, heavy, distending, cold, alleviate kapha-pitta, are constipating and aggravate vāta.

    Jujube fruit is sweet, unctuous, purgative and alleviates vāta and pitta. The same when dried alleviates kapha and vāta and also does not conflict in pitta. Simbitikā phala is astringent-sweet, cold and constipating.

    Fruits of gāṅgerukī, karīra, bimbi, todana and dhanwana are sweet, slightly astringent, cold and alleviate pitta and kapha.

    Fully ripe (fruits of) panasa, moca and rājādana are sweet, slightly astringent, unctuous, cold and heavy.

    Lavalī fruit is relishing due to astringent taste, non-sliminess and fragrance, used as avadaṃsa (in spicy preparations), is cordial and aggravates vāta.

    Nipa, śatāhvaka, pīlu, ketakī, vīkaṅkata and prācīnāmalaka–these alleviate (three) doṣas and poison.

    The fruit of iṅgudī is bitter-sweet, unctuous, hot and alleviates kapha and vāta.

    Tinduka alleviates kapha and pitta and is astringent, sweet and light.

    In āmalaka, there are all the rasas except lavaṇa (saline). It is rough, sweet, astringent, sour and excellent alleviator of kapha and pitta.

    Bibhītaka removes the disorders produced in rasa, rakta, māṃsa and medas, and alleviates hoarseness of voice, excessive secretion of sputum, and paittika disorders.
