XXVIII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              207

Dādima (pomegranates) which is sour and astringent-sweet, alleviates vāta,
is anti-diarrhoeal, appetiser, unctuous, hot, cordial and non-conflicting with kapha
and pitta. That which is only sour and rough aggravates pitta and vāta; while only
sweet alleviates pitta. Out of these (three varieties) the first one (sour sweet) is the
best one.

Vṛkṣāmla is anti-diarrhoeal, rough, hot and is useful for vāta and kapha.

The ripe fruit of tamarind has the same properties but slightly less.

Amlavetasa has also the same properties but is mass-breaking and is useful in
colics, anorexia, constipation, mild digestion, alcoholic complications, hiccup,
dyspnoea, cough, vomiting, disorders of stool and in all diseases caused by vāta
and kapha.

The kesara (stamen-like parts) of mātuluṅga is light while other parts are heavy.

Karcūra, devoid of skin, is relishing, appetiser, cordial, aromatic, alleviates kapha
and vāta and is useful in dyspnoea, hiccup and piles.

The fruit of nāgaraṅga (orange) is sweet, sourish, cordial, relishing, digested with
difficulty, alleviates vāta and is heavy.

Vātāma, abhiṣuka, akṣoṭa, mukūlaka, nikocaka alongwith urumāṇa are heavy,
hot, unctuous, sweet, tonic, vāta-alleviating, bulk-promoting, aphrodisiac and aggra-
vate kapha and pitta.

Priyāla is similar to them in properties except hotness.

Fruit of śleṣmātaka aggravates kapha, is sweet, cold and heavy.

Āṅkola fruit aggravates kapha, is heavy, distending and diminishes agni.

Śami fruit is heavy, hot, sweet, rough and destroys hairs.

Karaṅja fruit produces wind and is non-conflicting to vāta and kapha.

Sour āmrātaka, dantaśaṭha, karamardaka, and airāvata cause internal haemorrhage.

Vārtāka (fruit of vārtākī) alleviates vāta, is appetiser, pungent and bitter.

Parpaṭakī fruit aggravates vāta and alleviates kapha and pitta.

Ākṣikī fruit alleviates pitta and kapha, is sour and aggravates vāta.

Anūpākī fruits are sweet, amlavipāka and alleviate pitta and kapha.

The fruits of aśwattha, udumbara, plakṣa, nyagrodha are astringent-sweet, sour,
aggravate vāta and are heavy.

The stone (drupe) of bhallātaka is (vesicant) like fire but its māṃsa (the edible
portion) is sweet and cold.

Thus the fifth group of fruits, which is commonly used, is described. [125-165]
