XXVII]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              211

Water while falling down the sky, and coming in contact with the moon,
the air and the sun which follow time, gets impregnated with the properties of cold,
hot, unctuous, non-unctuous etc. and so when it rests on the ground. [197]

शीतं शुचि शिवं मृदु विमलं लघु बह्गुणम् । शृङ्गया दिव्यमुदकं, भ्रगं पात्रमपेहिते ।।१९८।।
बेले कचार्थ चदति पात्रवुरं स्वल्पं तिक्तकम् । कपिले कारारमधुरुदकं लवणाविकम् ।।१९९।।
कडु परितासितं मधुरं कृष्णमुलिकम् ।
एताः षाड्गुण्यमाख्यातं महीतलस्य जलस्य हि । तथाऽव्यक्तरसं विद्याद्दैवं कारु हिमं च षड् ।।२०० ।।
यद्वसिंष्ठाय पलनीस्तृशैः चोकाः यावे परिरुद्धतोयम् ।
तदैन्द्रमित्येव वदनि धीरा नरेन्द्रस्य सलिलं प्रधानम् ।।२०१।।
ईषत्कषायमधुरुं ईषत्लिरसं शिशिरं लघु । अवसकणविनुंदि स्यादुत्कृष्टं जलमनुमुखम् ।।२०२।।
गुर्भिभवनि भानोर्य कपिलैः संसृतं नवम् । तनु लवणनिर्मुण्डि पात्; शरदि वर्षिता ।।२०३।।
तनु वे सुकुमारः स्यु: लिनग्धग्रुतिकथेत्यनाम: । देयं पोल्ये च कतले च हल्ये घेये च शस्यते ।।२०४।।
हेमन्ते सलिलं रिनगम् सुणं वसनिष्ट गुरु । किंचिदलभो सहपुरं शिशिरे कफवातहम् ।।२०५।।
काष्यायमधुरं रूक्षं विद्याद्ग्रीमिकं जलम् ।

षेधिकस्य लवण्येभ्वनि वजनियेत्येव चिकित्सः । भ्रटताइसारिविद्याभ्यासम: यर्वे शृणुगरसा गुणा: ।।२०१।।
विज्ञानेतु हू कालेसु षट् प्रत्यर्थिनं जलस्य । सलिलेन हू कालेसु हू देयम् पुयतते नाम संग्रहे ।।२०७।।
राजभी राजशाहीस सुकुमारीतु भाव्ये: । भुगुरोहित: शारदाय: प्रयोक्ष्या विज्ञेय: ।।२०८।।

The rain water has, by nature, these six qualities—cold, pure, wholesome, palat-
able, clean and light.

Water when fallen on the earth depends (for its properties) on the containing
soil. In white (soil) it is astringent, in pale bitter, in brown alkaline, in lūsara saline, in
hilly area pungent and in black soil it is sweet. These are the six properties of the
water positioned on earth. The water derived from rain, hailstone and snow has
unmanifested rasa (taste). The water which falls from the sky, dropped by Indra, and
received in prescribed containers, is said as 'Aindra' (dropped by Indra) by the wise.
It is the principal water drinkable for the kings.

Best water is slightly astringent-swee, thin non-slimy, light, non-rough and non-
blocking of channels.

The fresh rain water of the rainy season is heavy, blocking of channels and
sweet. That of autumn is thin, light, non-blocking of channels. This should be used
by the delicate persons using unctuous and too much food in preparing various types
of diet such as eatable, chewable, lickable and drinkable. In hemanta (early winter),
water is unctuous, aphrodisiac, strength-promoting and heavy. That in śiśira
(later winter), it is lighter and alleviates kapha and vāta. The water of vasanta
(spring season) is astringent, sweet and rough. In summer it is non-blocking for
