XXVIII]                           SŪTRASTHĀNA                                213

शिक्षाशासकर तृण्णं पिच्छिलम्लमाविकम् । हस्तिनीनां पयो बल्यं गुरु स्वैर्यकरं परम् ॥ १२३११
जीवनं बृंहणं सात्म्यं स्नेहनं मानुषं पयः । नावनं रक्तपित्ते च तर्पणं चाक्षिशोधनम् ॥ १२३४॥

Group of milk and its products

The cow-milk has got these ten properties–sweet, cold, soft, unctuous, viscous, smooth, slimy, heavy, dull and clear. Thus it increases ojas having the same properties due to similarity. Hence (cow) milk has been said as the best one among vitalisers and as rasāyana.

The milk of buffaloe is heavier and colder than' that of cow. Because of plenty of fat it is useful for (the persons suffering from) sleeplessness and excessive digestive power.

The camel-milk is rough, hot, slightly saline, light and is prescribed for vāta kapha, hardness in bowels, worms swelling, abdominal disorders and piles.

The milk of one-hoofed animals (such as mare, ass etc.) promotes strength, stability, is hot, slightly sour, saline, rough, light and alleviates vāta in extremities.

The goat-milk is astringent-sweet, cold, constipating, light, alleviates internal haemorrhage, diarrhoea, wasting, cough and fever.

The milk of sheep produces hiccup and dyspnoea, is hot and aggravates pitta and kapha.

The milk of elephants promotes strength, is heavy and good stabiliser.

The human milk is vitaliser, bulk-promoting, suitable, uncting and is used as snuff in internal haemorrhage and saturating in pain in eyes. [217-224]

दोषन दीपनं तृष्णं बलवर्धनम् । पाकेऽल्लणुनां वातनं मधुरं बृंहणं रुचि ॥ १२३५॥
पीनसे वाहितासारं च शोदिकं विबन्धजत् । अर्थतो मूत्रकृच्छे च कारकं च दधि शस्यते ॥ १२३६॥
शरत्ग्रीष्मवसन्ते च प्रायशो दधि गर्हितम् । रक्तपित्तकफलोके विकाराभ्यासिने च तत् ॥ १२३७॥

Curd is relishing appetiser, aphrodisiac, uncting, strength-promoting, amlapāka, hot, alleviates vāta, is auspicious and bulk-promoting. It is useful in rhinitis, diarrhoea, shivering, intermittent fever, anorexia, dysuria and emaciation.

Curd is generally discarded in autumn, summer and spring. It is also harmful in the disorders caused by rakta, pitta and kapha. [225-227]

त्रिदोषं मन्दकं जातं वातनं दधि शुक्रलं यपः शोध्यमानिस्तरणं यपः शोदोशोधनम् ॥ १२३८॥

Mandaka (in which curdling process is slow and the product is imperfect) curd vitiates three dosas, the perfect curd alleviates vāta, the supernatant fatty layer promotes semen and the curd water alleviates kapha and vāta and cleanses channels. [228]

शोफाशीर्षशोणितोपमृत्प्रबलरक्तदाची । स्नेक्ष्यादयि पाञ्चाले तिक्तं द्राहारोगेषु च ॥ १२३९॥
