214                          CARAKA-SAMHITĀ                          [CH

Takra (buttermilk) is used in swelling, piles, grahaṇī doṣa, obstruction in
urine, abdominal disease, anorexia, snehavyāpad (hyperlipidaemia), paleness and
poisons. [229]

संशाडि दीपनं हृद्यं नवनीतं नवोदृषम् । बहष्णक्षीणकारनमदिलावितवाशनम् ॥ २ २ ९ ॥

Fresh butter is constipative, appetiser and cordial. It alleviates grahaṇī roga,
piles, facial paralysis and anorexia. [230]

स्मृतिप्रदियुक्तिमेः कफ-मेदोविवर्धनम् । वातापितानिलोनाप्दाहोपालष्मीज्वरापहम् ॥ २ ३ १ ॥
सर्पिरोलेण शीत मधुरं रासकाकम्: । साहस्रवीर्यं विविधिश्चैव कर्मकेहष्कम् ॥ २ ३ २ ॥
मदावमाप्मुकांश्चितोनोनारास्परम् । फॉनिऑनिरः;शूलं शूलं जीर्णगवोडिडि ॥ २ ३ ३ ॥
सर्पिषांविविधिहीरहम् स्त्रि निर्दिते ।

(Cow) ghee promotes memory, intelligence, agni, semen, ojas, kapha and medas;
alleviates vāta, pitta, poison, insanity, phthisis, inauspiciousness and fever. It is the
best of all fats, is cold, madhura rasa, madhura vipāka, has thousand potentialities and
so, if used properly according to prescribed methods, exerts thousand (types of) action. Old (cow) ghee alleviates intoxication, epilepsy, fainting, phthisis, insanity,
poison, fever and pain in female genital tract, ear and head.

Ghees of goat, sheep and buffalow may be known in properties like their
milk. [231-233]

घीयूण भोरटं चैव किलाटा विविधाश ये ॥ २ ३ ४ ॥
दोहाणींनामप्रिदांणे सर्व एष सुखेषुः । गुरुवल्सर्पणा सृष्ठा बृंहणः पवनापहः ॥ २ ३ ५ ॥
किंवडा गुरवो रुक्षा षाहिणसकाणिपकाः । गोरक्तानामं कणौं नवमः परिकीर्तितिः ॥ २ ३ ६ ॥

The products of milk such as Pīyūṣa (colostrum), Moraṭa (milk in second and
third weeks after delivery), various types of kilāṭa (insipissated milk)—all these are
beneficial for those having increased appetite and sleeplessness. They are heavy, satu-
rating, aphrodisiac, bulk-promoting and vāta-alleviating.

Takrapiṇḍaka (solid portion of butter milk) is non-slimy, heavy, rough and con-
stipating. Thus the ninth group of milk and its products is described. [234-236]

अथेहुणि:—
धूमः शीतः सरः सिनग्धो बृंहणो मधुरो रसः । इसहेभले भछितंत्वेहोणिप्तिकास्तु विदट्ठते ॥ २ ३ ७ ॥
शीषाण स्वादान्मन्युपित् यौणकांडोशतो बरः ।

Group of sugars (and honey)

The juice of sugarcane is aphrodisiac, cold, laxative, unctuous, bulk-promoting
and sweet. That of chewed cane aggravates kapha while that extracted with pressing
machine produces burning (with acidity). Due to coldness, clearness and sweetness
the pauṇḍraka variety (of sugarcane) is superior to the vaṃśaka one. [237]
