XXVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                              215

प्रभूतकिमिमज्जावसुदोषसंस्करी गुडः ।।२३६।।
क्षुद्री गुडाद्यभिनिषागाद्यक्षशेषिः । रसो गुडर्यादापूर्वं शीतः वसन्यन्नली गुडः ।।२३९।।
ततो मत्स्यान्डिकाखण्डशर्करा विपाकः परम् । यथा यथैषां वैगुण्यं भवेच्छीतं तथा ।।२४०।।
वृष्या छीणसतिता मन्देता गुडशर्करी । काण्यपयुगा शीता सतिता धावसंकरिः ।।२५।।
कलां यवतिसारस्त्री धेदेति गुडशर्करी । गुण्यगुण्यविपदार्थेषु प्रशस्ताः संसर्कराः ।।२५।।

Jaggery and minor jaggery produce plenty of worms, marrow, blood, fat and muscle. The cane-juice remained one fourth, one-third and half (in the process of boiling) is heavy in the preceding order.

Guḍa is the cleaned portion having little mala (molasses). Thereafter, by gradual elimination of mala matsyaṇḍikā, (semisolid treacle), khaṇḍa (yellowish sugar) and śarkarā (white sugar) emerge. Coldness appears in them gradually as their mala is eliminated.

The sugar obtained from jaggery is aphrodisiac, beneficial for the wounded and is unctuous. That obtained from yāsa is astringent-sweet, cold and slightly bitter. The honey-sugar is rough, anti-emetic, anti-diarrhoeal, and expectorant. All sugars are useful in thirst, internal haemorrhage and burning sensation. [238-242]

माक्षिक भ्रामर क्षौद्र पौतिक मधुजातयः । माक्षिक प्रवर तेषु विशेषाद्भ्रामरं गुरु ।।२४३।।
माक्षिकं तैलवर्णं स्नेहगुणवत् तु पौतिकम् । क्षौद्रं कपिलवर्णं स्निग्धक्षेत्रे भ्रामरमुच्यते ।।२४४।।
वातादर्थं गुरु शीतं च रक्तपित्तकफनाशनम् । सम्पाच् क्षेदनं शमं सह मधुरं सहगुरु ।।२४।।
हन्यान्मधुमधुपाचयेचा सांविधान्यचा । गुडूचकण्ठपाणावाकर्णेत्याहितं हितं मधु ।।२४।।

Honey is of four types—Māksika (derived from maksika), bhrāmara (derived from bhramara), ksaudra (derived from ksudra) and pauttika (derived from puttikā). Amongst them, māksika honey is the best one and the bhrāmara is the heaviest one. Māksika honey has oil-like colour, pauttika is of ghee-like colour, ksaudra is brownish and bhrāmara is white. Honey aggravates vāta, is heavy, cold, alleviates disorders of) rakta, pitta and kapha; is union-promoter, expectorant, rough, astringent, and sweet.

If heated or taken by a person suffering from heat becomes fatal due to its association with poisons. Honey is useful in small quantity due to its properties-heavy, rough, astringent and cold. [243-246]

नातः कठतरं किञ्चिन्मध्यामादि भावस्थु । एकस्यापित्रीतिलाभ्यां सयो हन्याच्छाच विष्णु ।।२४७।।
आमे सोष्णा क्रिया काये सा मध्वनि विरुध्यते ।
मध्वामं दाहनं तस्माद् सयो हन्याच्छाच विष्णु ।।२४८।।

There is nothing so severe as madhvāma (āma caused by honey) as, because of its conflicting treatment, it immediately kills the person like poison. In āma, hot measures are generally prescribed but in madhvāma it becomes conflicting. Hence it is very severe and kills immediately like poison. [247-248]
