XXVIII                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                217

odana is prepared of fried rice. Odana prepared of uncleaned grains, not well-filtered, not well-cooked and cold is heavy. Types of odana prepared with meat, vegetable fat, oil, ghee, marrow and fruits are strength-promoting, saturating cordial, heavy and bulk-promoting. Similar (in properties) are those cooked with black gram, sesamum, milk and green gram. [257-259]

कुल्माषा गुरवो रूक्षा वातला भिषग्वरैः: ।।२९०।।
विपक्वाणां च केषित् सौम्यादीनुपदेशतः । भिक्षूः षण यवायाश्चादिरहेतुस्तुलाषयम् ।।२९।।

Kulmāṣa (boiled and spiced grains) is heavy, rough, vāta-aggravating and purgative. The physician should determine heaviness and otherwise of other boiled grains such as legumes, wheat and barley. [260-261]

अधूर्त कृतपूयं च मुने संसर्गतिके रसम् । सूपमल्पस्न य मुने विविधासौरसः।।
।।२६२।।

In unspiced and spiced vegetable soups, mildly spiced and heavily spiced meat soup, and soared and un-soared pulses, the heaviness increases in progressive order. [262]

सकली वातला रूक्षा बहुश्चद्वनिपिंडिनः। तत्रयिये नै सधः सहोनलाय ।।२९।।
मधुर लपयः शीताः सकषाः शालिसंभवाः। शाडिंगो रशनिपतालतासवाक्रियोरपासः।।२९४।।

Flour of roasted grains aggravates vāta, is rough, produces abundant faeces and is carminative. Taken in liquid form, it saturates the person immediately and provides strength quickly. That prepared of śāli rice is sweet, light, cold, constipating and alleviates internal haemorrhage, thirst, vomiting and fever. [263-264]

हनास्तुपाणि यवको पाको यव च। उदावर्तशिरगृहासमाम् गुणैः परम्।।२९।।
मानससंस्तु ये भक्षाः यावले सेखत्वकाः। शुकमाहारचण्डीव विरिभिमालाय गुणैः।।२९९।।
विडिमाया मेकूला मेककूर्पाणि पिण्डका। ऊषा पूपिकाशायाः गुरुः पीपिकाः परम्।।२९७।।

Apūpa, yāvaka and vātya made of barley removes the diseases such as udāvarta, coryza, cough, prameha and throat diseases.

Preparations known as dhānā (fried grains) are mostly reducing because of dryness, saturating and digest with difficulty due to their distaining nature.

Germinated grains, fried grains, śaṣkuli, madhukroda, piṇḍaka, pūpa, pūpalikā etc. are heavy; the preparations of (rice) flour are heaviest. [265-267]

फलमाँसबसतिलशहदयोगसंस्काराः। भक्षा वृष्णय बल्यश्च गुरवो बृंहणांश्चैव।।२९।।
देखायाः गुरू; तैनवो बलवर्धनैः। सूपमिलेणे गुरुः श्रेयोड्डमुचकाषयम्।।२९।।
शमाः सतिलाख़त सहारशनिष्ठहृन्मः। भक्षा रक्षण तन्त्रैं च गुरुः शनैः।।२९७०।।

The preparations processed with fruits, meat, fat, vegetable, sesamum paste and honey are aphrodisiac, strength-promoting, heavy and bulk-promoting.

Vesavāra is heavy, unctuous and promotes strength and development.

Pūpa prepared with milk and sugarcane juice is heavy, saturating and aphrodisiac.

33 C.S. - I
