228                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

even except the use of unwholesome food such as–abnormality in time factor, intel-
lectual error and unsuitable sound, touch, vision, taste and smell. These etiological
factors afflict the person in spite of his taking proper food. That is why the persons
taking wholesome food are also seen as diseased. In case of those taking unwhole-
some food too, the fault dose not produce derangements immediately due to certain
reasons such as unwholesomeness of articles are not equally deranging nor have the doṣas
equal strength, all persons also are not (equally) capable to resist the disease (have no
equal immunity). The same faulty regimen becomes more obnoxious due to place,
time, combination, potency and excessive quantity. The same doṣa too, in combina-
tion with other doṣa, having contradictory therapy, deep-seated, with long duration,
located in the organs of vital breath, affecting the vital parts becomes curable
with difficulty and even fatal emergently. The persons too obese, too lean, having
uncompact muscles, blood and bones, indulged in unsuitable food, under-nour-
ished and having weak mind are not able to resist diseases, contrary to them are
resistant to diseases. Because of variations in faulty diet, innate pathogenic factors
and the condition of the body the diseases become mild or severe, acute or chronic.
The same vāta, pitta and kapha, vitiated in different locations produce different disor-
ders, O Agniveśa! [7]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on diseases by location]

I will describe further the diseases produced by doṣas vitiated in different loca-
tions like rasa etc. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on rasa-doṣa]

Loss of desire for food, anorexia, distaste in mouth, loss of taste sensation,
nausea, heaviness, drowsiness, body-ache, fever, feeling of darkness, paleness,
obstruction in channels, impotency, malaise, leanness, loss of digestive power,
untimely wrinkles and grey hair–these are the disorders due to morbid affection
of rasadhātu. [9-10]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on rakta-doṣa]

Further will be mentioned the diseases due to affection of rakta. Leprosy, erysip-
elas, boils, internal haemorrhage, menorrhagia, rasapittam, herpes, anus and mouth,
spleen, gulma, abscess, nīlikā, jaundice, vyaṅga, piplu, tilakālaka (black moles), ring-
worm, psoriasis, leucoderma, papules, urticarial patches, red patches–these are caused
by morbid affection of rakta. [11-12]
