240                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

psychic disorder, is particularly youthful, capable with strength, energy, reputation
manliness and prowess, possessing knowledge, specific knowledge and strong sense
organs and sense objects; having immense wealth and various favourable enjoyments,
has achieved desired results of all actions and moves about where he likes. contrary
to it is unhappy life.

Life is said as beneficial if the person is well-wisher of all the creatures, abstains
from taking other's possession, is truth-speaking, calm, taking steps after-examining
the situation, free from carelessness, observing the three categories (virtue, wealth
and enjoyment) without their mutual conflict, worshipping the worthy persons, is de-
voted to knowledge, understanding and serenity of mind, keeping company of the
elderly persons, has controlled well the impulses of attachment, aversion, envy, in-
toxication and conceit, is engaged in various types of gifts, constantly devoted to
penance, knowledge and peace, has knowledge of and devotion to metaphysics, keep-
ing eye to both the worlds and is endowed with memory and intelligence. Contrary to
it is non-beneficial life. [24]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on measures and exceptions]

The measure of life is known by the adventitious pathological symptoms in
relation to objects, sense organs, mind, intellect, movement etc. such as one will die
after a moment, hour or day; three, five, seven, ten or twelve days, a fortnight, month,
six months or a year. 'Swabhāva' (becoming own self), 'Pravṛttyuparama' (cessation
of activities), 'maraṇa' (death), 'anityatā' (non-eternality), nirodha (annihilation)–all
are synonymous. This is the measure of life. Contrary to this is non-measure which is
described in the context of ariṣṭas (sudden appearance of fatal signs). In Āyurveda,
the measure of life has also been described according to the body constitution. [25]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on object of Āyurveda]

The object (of Āyurveda) is to protect health of the healthy and to alleviate
disorders in the diseased. [26]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on Āyurveda's eternity]
