XXX]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  241

[Devanagari unclear: continuing verses on eternity]

Āyurveda is said as eternally continuing because of its beginningless-ness,
the characters of entities having been determined by universal nature and the charac-
ters of substances being eternal. There was never non-existence of the flow of life
or intellect. The knower of Āyurveda is also eternally continuing. Pleasure (health)
and pain (disease) alongwith material factors, causes and symptoms, because of
their inter-relations, are also eternal. All these point towards the eternal continuity
of Āyurveda. (Secondly), substances having properties of heavy, light, cold, hot,
unctuous, rough etc. are subjected to increase or decrease by the rule of similarity
and dissimilarity. As is said, in case of regular intake of heavy substances, the
heavy will increase and the light will decrease. Thus in case of other substances
as well. This character of entities is eternal. (Thirdly), the characters of the sub-
stances like earth etc. are also eternal. The substances alongwith their properties
are eternal. Āyurveda never arose out of non-existence except understanding and
precepts; some say its origin in view of these two. Its natural characters are
non-artificial as said here and in the first chapter such as hotness of fire and liquidity
of water. It has also got the eternal continuity of natural characters of entities such
as increase in heavy substances, decrease in light substances by regular intake of the
heavy ones. [27]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on eight divisions]

Āyurveda has eight divisions such as–Kāyacikitsā (medicine), Śālākya (deal-
ing with diseases of supra-clavicular region), Śālyāpahartṛka (dealing with extrac-
tion of foreign bodies), Viṣa-gara-vairodhika-praśamana (dealing with alleviation
of poisons, artificial poisons and toxic symptoms due to intake of antagonistic
substances), Bhūta vidyā (dealing with spirits or organisms), Kaumārabhṛtya
(Pediatrics), Rasāyana (dealing with promotive measures) and Vājīkaraṇa (dealing
with aphrodisiacs). [28]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on those who should study]

36 C.S.-I
