242                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

That (Āyurveda) should be studied by Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas.
Brāhmaṇas should study it for welfare of living beings, Kṣatriyas for their protec-
tion and Vaiśyas as profession or generally by all for the achievement of virtue,
wealth and enjoyment. That he makes efforts in alleviation of disorders of spiritual
scholars, those treading on virtuous path or preachers of virtue in his parents, family
members, kinfolk and teachers and that he thinks over, teaches and practises the
basic truths said in Āyurveda is his excellent virtue. That he receives remuneration
and protection from the king or wealthy persons in lieu of providing health to them
and that he protects the patients from illness treated under him is his artha (wealth
and fruition of purpose). That he is honoured by the learned men, gets reputation
and saviourness, respect and service and that he provides health to the diseased ones,
is his kāma (enjoyment). Thus the topics have been dealt with completely according
to questions. [29]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on physician's full proficiency]

One physician, at the very start, should ask the other physician about eight top-
ics–treatise, scope of the treatise, section, scope of the section, chapter, scope of the
chapter, topics, scope of the topics. The other physician should reply dealing entirely
with the subject by means of text, interpretation and recapitulation. [30]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on tantra synonyms]

Āyurveda has synonyms such as–Sākhā, Vidyā, Sūtra, Jñāna, Śāstra, Lakṣaṇa
and Tantra. [31]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on scope of treatise]

The scope of the treatise has been said in its definitions–that, considered ac-
cording to contexts, is again divided into ten–body (anatomy), its functions
(physiology), causes (etiology), disease (pathology), operations (therapeutics),
objective to be achieved (health), time (environments and stages of disease), doer
(physician), instrument (therapeutic measures) and method (procedure of treatment
including preparations). These contexts will be considered in the entire text. [32]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on sthāna and chapters]
