XXX]                          SŪTRASTHĀNA                                  243

There are eight Sthānas (sections) in the treatise such as–Śloka (Sūtra), Nidāna,
Vimāna, Śārīra, Indriya, Cikitsita, Kalpa and Siddhi. Śloka sthāna has thirty adhyāyas
(chapters), nidāna, vimāna and śārīra sthānas each having eight chapters, indriyasthāna
has twelve chapters, cikitsitasthāna has thirty chapters, kalpa and siddhi sthānas each
having twelve chapters. [33]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on chapter completion]

Thus is said:–

The treatise has been completed in Śloka, Cikitsita, Indriya, Kalpa, Siddhi, Nidāna,
Vimāna and Śārīra sthānas. Out of them the first two with thirty chapters each, the
latter three with twelve chapters each and the last three with eight chapters each. [34]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on scope of sections]

The scope of the sections will be said in the respective sections. Now hear the
one hundred twenty chapters with their titles and order. [35]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse listing chapters of Sūtrasthāna]

The quadruplet on drugs consists of the chapters on longevity, apāmārga
seeds, āragvadha and six locations of evacuation. That on the healthy consists of
quantity of diet, his diet, non-suppression of urges and introductory description of
sense organs. That on precepts consists of lesser quadruplet, greater quadruplet,
three desires and merits and demerits of vāta. In the quadruplet on preparation, there
are chapters on unction, fomentation, arrangement of equipments and well-equipped
physician. In the quadruplet on diseases, there are chapters on the number of cranial
diseases, three swellings, eight abdominal diseases and major disorders. The quadru-
plet on planning consists of the chapters on the eight despicables, reducing and
saturating therapies and properly formed blood. The quadruplet on diet consists
of the chapters on the origin of person, Ātreya-Bhādrakāpya (discussion among the
sages), food and drinks and various types of food and drinks, The two last chapters–
