246                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: verse on chapter scope]

The scope of the chapter will be said in the respective chapters under different
sections–thus one should be able to tell about the scope of the respective subjects
from the entire treatise. [68]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on inquiry]

Interrogation is the question on any subject from the treatise according to the
accepted procedure. Interpretation of the interrogation is the rational solution of the
same on the basis of the treatise. The word 'Tantra' is derived from 'tantraṇa' (pervasi-
veness and protection), 'Sthāna' from 'arthapratiṣṭhā' (containing the subject well)
and the titles of the adhyāyas (chapters) are based on various topics. Thus according
to query, the entire 'Aṣṭaka' (eight topics) has been explained. In this way, the well-
defined subject-matter of the text has also been said in entirety. [69-71]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on physician proficiency]

There are persons having partial and superficial informations whose unexpected
flying up creates irritation like the sound of male bustard. Hence, in the beginning of
the talk, one should always put the eight topics with a view to testing the superiority or
inferiority because there are only the well-versed in scriptures can stand while those
knowing a portion of it feel giddy by the very sword of the entire treatise like the
week bustards by the sound of bow-string. [72-74]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on physicians and crows]

Some animal in the midst of the weak ones behaves like a wolf but finding a
real wolf it reverts to its natural position. Likewise, a fool on the basis of his
talkativeness, establishes his authority among the fools but is exposed in face of
the real authority. Like large brown mongoose hidden in its own woollen bristles,
what the fool having no wide knowledge can speak in disussions as a clumsy,
dull one. The physician should not come in conflict with men of noble conduct
