272                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

One who excretes urine frequently as white and flour-like is said to be suffering
from śuklameha due to vitiation of kapha.

One who passes urine frequently like semen or mixed with semen is said a pa-
tient of śukrameha due to vitiation of kapha.

One who passes urine frequently as excessively sweet and cold is known as a
patient of śītameha due to vitiation of kapha.

One who passes small particles situated morbidly in urine is known as a patient
of sikatāmeha due to vitiation of kapha.

One who passes urine with difficulty and slowly without any urge is known as
suffering from śanairmeha due to vitiation of kapha.

One who excretes urine as bound with threads, saliva-like and slimy should be
known as a patient of ālālameha due to vitiation of kapha.

Thus the above ten types of prameha due to vitiation of kapha have been de-
scribed. [12-23]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on causes of pittaja prameha]

Now (I) shall mention the causes of pittaja pramehas:–

The person suffering from kṣārameha due to vitiation of pitta passes urine like
alkali in respect of smell, colour, taste and touch.

One should be diagnosed as a case of kālameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes constantly urine as hot and of black colour.

One should be known as suffering from nīlameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes urine as sour and having colour like that of the feather of the cāṣa (bird).

One should be known as a patient of raktameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes urine as having fleshy smell, saline, hot and red.

One should be diagnosed as a case of mañjiṣṭhameha due to vitiation of pitta if
he excretes urine frequently like the decoction of mañjiṣṭhā (a red herb root) and
having fleshy smell.

One should be known as a patient of hāridrameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes urine like decoction of haridrā (yellow) and as pungent.

Thus the above six types of prameha due to vitiation of pitta have been des-
cribed. [27-35]
