IV]                           NIDĀNASTHĀNA                                  273

[Devanagari unclear: verse on pittaja prameha and treatment]

All these are palliable because of their causation by combined doṣas, location in
medas and contradictory treatment.

Here are the verses for detailed knowledge of pittaja pramehas:–

The person suffering from kṣārameha due to vitiation of pitta passes urine like
alkali in respect of smell, colour, taste and touch.

One should be known as a patient of kālameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes constantly urine as hot and of black colour.

One should be known as suffering from nīlameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes urine as sour and having colour like that of the feather of the cāṣa (bird).

One should be known as a patient of raktameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes urine as having fleshy smell, saline, hot and red.

One should be diagnosed as a case of mañjiṣṭhameha due to vitiation of pitta if
he excretes urine frequently like the decoction of mañjiṣṭhā (a red herb root) and
having fleshy smell.

One should be known as a patient of hāridrameha due to vitiation of pitta if he
passes urine like decoction of haridrā (yellow) and as pungent.

Thus the above six types of prameha due to vitiation of pitta have been des-
cribed. [27-35]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on causes of vāta-prameha]

If a person who uses hot, sour, saline, alkaline and pungent food and food during
indigestion, is exposed to very intense heat of the sun and fire, exertion, anger and
irregular diet, and having similar body, pitta gets vitiated immediately and by the
same mechanism gives rise instantaneously to these six types of prameha. Their spe-
cific names are based on the specific properties of pitta such as–kṣārameha, kālameha,
nīlameha, lohitameha, mañjiṣṭhameha and hāridrameha. They are associated with the
six properties of pitta such as alkalinity, sourness, salinity, pungency, fleshy smell
and hotness. [24-26]

40 C.S. - I
