274                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

and causes continuous excretion of urine due to abundance of lasīkā and frequent
urination with obstruction due to its dispersing nature, the person passes urine con-
stantly without any urge like an excited elephant and thus he is called a patient
of hastimeha. Ojas is of sweet nature but when due to roughness of vāyu it gets
associated with astringency and is carried to urinary bladder, it gives rise to
madhumeha (diabetes). [36-37]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on vātaja prameha types]

Their specific names are also, as said above, according to specific properties
such as–vasāmeha, majjameha, hastimeha and madhumeha.

Here are the verses for the detailed knowledge of the (types) of vātika prameha.

One who passes urine frequently mixed with vasā (muscle fat) or similar to it is
said to be suffering from vasāmeha due to vitiation of vāta. It is incurable.

One who passes urine of majjā (marrow) alongwith urine frequently is known as a patient
of majjameha due to vitiation of vāta. It is incurable.

One who passes urine excessively and constantly like an excited elephant is known
as a patient of hastimeha due to vitiation of vāta. It is incurable.

One who passes urine as astringent-sweet, pale and rough should be diagnosed as
a case of madhumeha (diabetes) due to vitiation of vāta which is incurable.

Thus these four types of prameha due to vitiation of vāta are described.

[Devanagari unclear: verses on vātika premeha effect]

Physicians say these four types of prameha caused by vāta as incurable because
of great severity and contradictory treatment. [38-46]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on prameha symptoms]

Thus twenty types of prameha caused by vitiation of three doṣas are (also) de-
scribed. [38-46]

[Devanagari unclear: more verses on prodroma]

Pramehas, on chronicity, give rise to these complications–thirst, diarrhoea, fe-
ver, burning sensation, debility, anorexia, indigestion, boils due to sloughing of mus-
cles, like alajī, vidradhī etc.

Amongst them, the curable types of prameha should be treated with evacuative
and pacificatory measures, as required. [48-49]
