VI]                           NIDĀNASTHĀNA                                  285

The irregular dieting is a cause of phthisis will be explained further. When a
person takes usually the food–drinkable, eatable, chewable and lickable–irregularly
in terms of nature, preparation, combination, quantity, place, time, rules for dietitic
use and suitability, his vāta, pitta and kapha attain imbalance. These imbalanced doṣas
spreading in the body when stay obstructing the openings of channels whatever food
he takes is mostly transformed into urine and faeces only and not so into other dhātus.
In this stage he continues on the support of faeces, hence faeces should be protected
particularly in case of the person suffering from phthisis and also of that who is too
much lean and weak. In him devoid of nourishment, doṣas aggravated due to irregular
dieting produce respective complications and lead to further degradation. Vāta causes
pain, body-ache, irritation of throat, chest pain, pain in shoulders, hoarseness of voice
and coryza, pitta causes fever, diarrhoea, internal heat and kapha produces coryza,
heaviness of head, anorexia and cough. Due to frequent cough lungs are injured and
haemoptysis ensues and consequently debility arises. Thus these three doṣas aggra-
vated by irregular dieting produce phthisis. Having been afflicted with these wasting
complications, the patient gradually dries up. Hence the wise should take food which
is not irregular in terms of nature, preparation, combination, quantity, place, time,
rules of dietitic use and suitability. [10-11]

Here is the verse–

[Devanagari unclear: verse on troublesome diseases]

Observing many troublesome diseases caused by irregular dieting, the wise should
eat wholesome, measured and timely food with self-restraint. [10-11]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on rājayakṣmā]

By regular use of these four etiological factors of phthisis vāta, pitta and kapha
get vitiated. These vitiated doṣas dry up the body with various complications.
Physicians call it Rājayakṣmā because it is the most troublesome among all the diseases
or because in early times it afflicted the Lord Moon, the king of stars. [12]
