I]                            NIDĀNASTHĀNA                                  303

[Devanagari unclear: verse on rasas described above]

The effect of rasas is described above. Now (I) shall describe the effect of dravya.
Oil, ghee and honey are the substances efficacious in pacification of vāta, pitta and
kapha respectively. [13]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on oil, ghee, honey]

Oil possesses the properties of unctuousness, hotness and heaviness and as such
overcomes vāta by regular use. Vāta possess roughness, coldness and lightness and as
such is contrary in properties. When the contraries meet together the stronger one
subdues the weaker one, hence oil overcomes vāta by regular use. In the same way,
ghee overcomes pitta due to sweetness, coldness and dullness because pitta is non-
sweet, hot and sharp. Honey overcomes kapha due to roughness, sharpness and astrin-
gency because kapha is unctuous, dull and sweet. Any other substance which is con-
trary in properties to vāta, pitta and kapha overcome them by regular use. [14]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on long pepper]

One should not use these three substances excessively in comparision to other
ones such as–long pepper, alkali and salt. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on long pepper, alkali and salt]

Long peppers are pungent but sweet in vipāka, heavy, not too much unctuous,
hot and moistening. They are esteemed among drugs and immediately exhibit their
good or bad effect. If used properly they have merits and are beneficial apparently
but lead to consequent accumulation of doṣas; if constantly used they aggravate kapha
due to heaviness and moistening and pitta due to hotness while they are unable to
pacify vāta because of little unctuousness and hotness. However, they are synergistic
in action. Hence one should not use long peppers excessively. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on alkali]

Alkali endowed with hotness, sharpness and lightness and first moistens but later
on dries up. It is used for digestion, burning and tearing but if used excessively dam-
ages hairs, eyes, heart and virility. The people of villages, cities, communes and dis-
tricts who use it continuously suffer from blindness, impotency, baldness and grey
hairs and are prone to cardiac disorders. Such as the inhabitants of the eastern region
and China. Hence one should not use alkali excessively. [17]
