304                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on salt]

Salt is endowed with hotness and sharpness and is not so heavy and unctuous,
moistening, laxative, relishing, apparently beneficial because of exerting good ef-
fects if used properly, but later on causes accumulation of doṣas. It is used for pro-
moting relish, digestion, moistening and purgation and from excessive use produces
malaise, laxity and debility in the body. The people of villages, cities, communes and
districts who use it continuously are exceedingly depressed, having loose muscles
and blood and unable to bear pain such as the inhabitants of bāhlīka, sauraṣṭra, sindhu
and sauvīra, they take salt even with milk. Moreover, in the regions of the world
which are barren with saline soil, plants–herbs, shrubs, trees and big trees–do not
grow or are with stunted growth because of damage by salt. Hence one should not
use salt too much. Even the persons who are suited to excessive use of salt fall victims
to untimely baldness, greying of hairs and wrinkles. [18]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on giving up substances]

Hence it is beneficial for them to go away gradually from the suitability in re-
spect of these substances. The suitable things, if given up gradually, cause no or little
harm. [19]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on Sātmya]

Sātmya means that which suits the self. Sātmya is regarded as having same mean-
ing. It is of three types superior, inferior and medium, and of seven types accord-
ing to six rasas individually and collectively. Amongst them, use of all the rasas collec-
tively is superior, that of one rasa inferior and that of two rasas medium. The
inferior and the medium types of suitability be upgraded to the superior type only in
graded manner. Even if one has achieved the suitability of all six rasas collectively,
he should insist on the use of the wholesome things keeping in consideration all the
specific factors of the method of dieting starting from nature to the consumer (as the
eighth factor). [20]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on eight factors of dieting]

There are eight specific factors of method of dieting such as–nature, proce-
ssing, combination, quantity, place, time, rules for use and consumer, the eighth
one. [21]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on prakṛti]

Prakṛti is swabhāva (nature) which is the natural existence of properties like guru
etc. in substances used as food and drug; such as–black gram (heavy) and green
gram (light), pork (heavy) and venison (light). (1)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on karaṇa (processing)]

Karaṇa (processing) is the modification or refinement of the natural products which
means imparting other properties. These properties are infused by contact of water
and fire, cleansing, churning, place, time, infusing, steeping etc. and also by long
duration, utensil etc. (2)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on saṃyoga]

Saṃyoga (combination) is aggregate of two or more substances. This exhibits
peculiarities which are not seen in case of individual substances. Such as combination
of honey and ghee, and that of honey, fish and milk. (3)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on rāśi (quantity)]

44 C.S. - I
