312                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on āma management]

toms of over-affection of āma except vomiting and diarrhoea. Aggravated and viti-
ated doṣas, when their passage is blocked by over-vitiated āma and they move ob-
liquely, sometimes stiffen the entire body like a staff. This (condition) is known as
'daṇḍālasaka' which is incurable. The āmadoṣa in those who habitually take antago-
nistic food, meals when previous meal is not digested and meals during indigestion
is said as 'āmaviṣa' (toxaemia due to āma) by physicians because it produces
symptoms like those of poisoning. This is exceedingly incurable because of its
emergent nature and contradictory management. [12]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on management of āma]

The curable type of affected āma, if stagnant, should be eliminated through emesis
by administering hot saline water and then application of fomentation and supposi-
tory keeping the patient on fast. In viṣūcikā, reducing measures are adopted in the
beginning and after management like that in purgation. In conditions of over-vitiation
of āma, during meal time, inspite of the previous meal having been digested if the
stomach is still coated with doṣas, abdomen is cold and heavy and there is aversion to
food; drug should be administered for digestion of the remnant doṣas and kindling of
(digestive) fire. The patient should never eat during indigestion. Agni weakened by
overvitiated āma is not capable of digesting the derangement, drug and food simulta-
neously. Over and above, the faulty course of over-vitiated āma, food and drug, due
to over-strength, fells down suddenly the patient who is already weak and has lowered
body-fire. Cessation of the disorders caused by āma is managed with desaturating
therapy. If it continues further one should adopt appropriate measure contrary to
disease leaving aside that contrary to etiology for the control of diseases in which
desaturation has already been done.

For control of all diseases, the experts recommend therapy contrary to cause
and disease or which serve their purpose. When the patient is relieved of the
over-affection of āma, his morbidity has been described as alleviated. The agni is stimulated, he
