III]                          VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  317

have no similarity in either death or previous deeds, five-fold (evacuative) therapy is
the best treatment. Thereafter proper use of rasāyana measures and management with
the drugs collected previously is recommended. Truthfulness, benevolence, charity,
offerings, worship of gods, observance of noble's conduct, calmness, self-protection,
residence in healthy places, observance of celibacy and company of those who are
observing celibacy, discourse of religious scriptures, narratives of self-controlled great
sages, constant company with religious, pure and those regarded by the elders–this is
the management for the protection of life for those whose death is not certain at that
difficult period. [12-18]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Agniveśa's question]

Having heard the causes of epidemics Agniveśa again put a query to Lord Ātreya–
O Lord! (tell us) what is the root cause of the derangement of vāyu etc. due to which
they give rise to epidemics (and destroy the community) ? [19]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on adharma]

Lord Ātreya replied–the root cause of the derangement of all vāyu etc. is
unrighteousness. That also arises from the misdeeds of the previous life but the source
of both is intellectual error. Such as–when the Heads of country, city, town and
community having transgressed the virtuous path deal unrighteously with the people,
their officers and subordinates, people of the city and community, and traders carry
this unrighteousness further. Thus this unrighteousness by force makes the righteous-
ness disappear. The people with righteousness having disappeared, are aban-
doned even by gods. Consequently when righteousness has disappeared,
unrighteousness has the upper hand and the gods have deserted the place, the seasons
get affected and because of this it does not rain in time, or at all or there is abnormal
rainfall, winds blow properly, the land is affected, water reservoirs get dried
up and the herbs giving up their natural properties acquire morbidity. Then epidemics
break out due to polluted contacts and edibles. [20]
