III]                          VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  319

gods, godly sages, virtue, religious sacrifices and method of their performance; with
the body compact and stable like the essence of mountains, and complexion and
sense organs clear, having strength, speed and valour like the wind, with well-formed
buttocks, endowed with appropriate measurement (size), physiognomy, cheerfulness
and corpulence, were devoted to truthfulness, straightforwardness, uncruelty, charity,
control on senses, observance of rules, penance, fasting, celibacy and vows; devoid
of fear, attachment, aversion, confusion, greed, anger, grief, conceit, illness, sleep,
drowsiness, fatigue, exhaustion, lassitude and holding and were having immeasurable
life-span. For those having exalted mind, qualities and actions the crops grew endowed
with inconceivable rasa, vīrya, vipāka and prabhāva and other properties due to presence
of all qualities in the earth etc. in the beginning of kṛtayuga. At the declining of the
kṛtayuga, due to over-receiving there arose heaviness in bodies of these wealthy per-
sons; heaviness of the body led to fatigue, lassitude, hoarding, holding and greed in
successive order (all this happened) in kṛtayuga itself. In Tretā, greed gave rise to
malice, speaking lie, passion, anger, conceit, dislike, roughness, voilence, fear, in-
fliction, grief, anxiety, excitement etc. successively. Thus during tretā a quarter of
righteousness disappeared due to which there was reduction of a quarter in the yearly
duration of the yugas (ages) and consequent degradation of quarter in unctuousness,
purity, rasa, vipāka, prabhāva and other properties of the crops. Because of this the
bodies of the people due to intake of food degraded by a quarter in properties and
other behaviours were not resistent as earlier and as such were pervaded by agni (pitta)
and vāta and were attacked first by diseases like fever etc. Thus the living beings
were gradually affected by decrease in their life-span. [24]

भवन्ति चात्र–

Here are the verses–

[Devanagari unclear: verse on yugas]

In yuga after yuga a quarter of righteousness is reduced in this order along with
similar reduction in the qualities of living beings leading finally to dissolution of the
universe. After completion of one hundred years, there is a loss of one year in the life-
span of the living beings in respective ages.

Thus is said the initial origin of the disorders. [25-27]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Agniveśa's question]
