324                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on three types]

Amongst them, reducing therapy is recommended for those having doṣas with a
little strength. By reducing therapy agni and vāta are increased which dry up the
little doṣas like the wind and the sun drying up the little water. The reducing cum
digesting therapy is prescribed in case of doṣas with medium strength. By this therapy,
the moderate doṣas are dried up in the same way as the moderate quantity of water is
dried up by the sun-heat and wind and also by sprinkling dust and ashes. In case of
abundant doṣas, only letting out of doṣas is prescribed, there is no remedy for over-
flowing of a small pool except by breaking down field barriers. The therapy of letting
out doṣas works in the same way. [44]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on doṣas]

Letting out of doṣas or other therapeutic measure, even if opportune, should not
be applied to these cases such as–those who have not counteracted censure against
them, who are poor, have no attendants, regard themselves as physicians, are violent,
back-biters, intensely indulged in vicious acts, have strength, muscles and blood too
much depleted, are inflicted with incurable disease and are associated with the fatal
sings. The physician, if treats such patients, gets sinful defamation. [45]

भवति चात्र–

Here is the verse–

[Devanagari unclear: verse on the wise's act]

The act which has undesirable consequence presently or afterwards in associa-
tion should not be done, this is the view of the wise (men).

(The region which has little water and a few trees, strong winds and intense sun
is known as jāṅgala (hilly or arid). There occurs the least number of diseases.

On the contrary, the region having abundant water and numerous trees, mild air
and scarce sun is anūpa (marshy) which gives rise to plenty of doṣas. Sādhāraṇa
(moderate) type of region shows balance in these aspects. [46-48]

तत्र श्लोकाः–

Now (the summing up) verses–
