VI]                           VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  335

variations. The reason is that the classifier classifies the entity from various points of
view, thus he does not contradict if he classifies the entity, already classified earlier
from some point of view, from other points of view and finds various numbers of
groups. In case of similar dividing factor too, it is necessary to consider the refer-
ence to the context because similar words have different meanings while different
synonyms have similar meaning. For instance, the word 'roga' denotes doṣas as well
as disorder. 'Doṣa' has synonyms such as roga, ātaṅka, yakṣman, doṣaprakṛti and
vikāra; vyādhi also has got the same synonyms. Thus the word 'roga' is similar in
case of doṣa as well as vyādhi while in other cases it is dissimilar. [4]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on diseases as innumerable]

Diseases are innumerable because of being too numerous while doṣas are nu-
merable because of being not too numerous. Hence (I) will explain the disorders
only as examples like pictures but will describe doṣas fully. Rajas and tamas are the
two psychic doṣas. They cause disorders like passion, anger, greed, confusion, envy,
conceit, narcosis, anxiety, excitement, fear, exhilaration etc. Vāta, pitta and kapha
are the bodily doṣas. They cause disorders such as fever, diarrhoea, swelling, phthisis,
dyspnoea, prameha, leprosy etc. Thus doṣas are said in entirety while the disorders
partially. [5]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on numerable types of doṣas]

For both these (types) of doṣas, there are three aggravating factors such as–
unsuitable contact of objects with sense organs, intellectual error and conse-
quence. [6]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on vitiated dūṣyas]

While vitiated they produce innumerable different disorders due to different vi-
tiating factors and the dūṣya (affected entities). [7]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on vāyu psychic and somatic disorder combination]

These (psychic and somatic) diseases sometimes continuing together are associ-
ated mutually such as passion etc. and fever etc. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on rajas-tamas]
