336                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

There is constant association of rajas and tamas together because tamas can't
move on without (the help of) rajas. [9]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on sannipāta and saṃsarga]

(Often) the bodily doṣas situated in one location combine together by either
sannipāta (combination of all the three doṣas together) or saṃsarga (combination of
two doṣas together) because of having similar properties; doṣas are similar to the
vitiating factors. [10]

[Devanagari unclear: verses on primary and secondary disorder]

Now the difference between primary and secondary disorders–primary disorder
is that which is independent, has symptoms manifested, and etiology and remedy as
described while the secondary disorder is that having contrary characters.

When doṣas having characters of primary disorder combine all the three together
that is called as sannipāta or if combine two together that is saṃsarga. Due to varia-
tions in primary and secondary characters there are numerous variations in doṣas. Thus
the physicians attribute various nomenclatures to doṣas and disorders classified in
different groups according to various factors. [11]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on agni four categories]

There are four categories of bodily fire (agni) according to intensity–such
as intense, mild, regular and irregular. Amongst them, the intense fire can tolerate
all sorts of improper regimen while the mild one has got the contrary character.
The regular fire gets affected by improper regimen but otherwise remains normal,
the irregular fire has got the character contrary to that of the regular fire. These
four types of fire are found in four types of persons. The persons having normal
constitution with vāta, pitta and kapha in equilibrium have regular fire; in those
of vātika constitution, because of the seat of fire having been subdued by vāta, fire
becomes irregular. Likewise, in persons having paittika constitution the seat of fire
