VI]                           VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  337

is subdued by pitta and thus the fire becomes intense. In persons having śleṣmika
constitution, the seat of fire is subdued by kapha and the fire becomes mild. [12]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on no person having all dhātus equilibrium]

On this some say–"there are no persons having all the three doṣas in equilibrium
because of the use of unbalanced food, thus some are having vātika constitution, some
paittika constitution and others kaphaja one. This is not correct. Why? because the
physicians take the person having balanced vāta, pitta and kapha as healthy, health is
normalcy and for the same object therapeutic measures are applied. Hence there are
(person having prakṛti as) balanced vāta, pitta and kapha but there are no prakṛti
(constitution) like vātika, paittika or kaphaja. Because of predominance of certain doṣa
in person the respective doṣaprakṛti of the same is said, but as there can't be normalcy
in imbalanced doṣas they can't be taken as prakṛti. The concerned person can only be
said as vātala pittala and śleṣmala (having perpondrome & vāta, pitta and kapha
respectively) and they all are in the state of abnormality. [13]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on people categories and treatment]

In respect of these four types of persons, four types of measures are beneficial.
In case of those having all the dhātus in balance, the measure balanced in all aspects
should be adopted. In cases of other three having predominance of one or the other doṣa,
the measures contrary to doṣas, after considering the predominance of the respective doṣa,
are beneficial till agni becomes regular. Thereafter balanced measure should be ap-
plied. Similarly, observance of behaviour and application of remedy is advised in
similar cases. These will be explained further in detail. [14]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on three types of persons]

Three types of person are taken as diseased though there are normal in view of
the physicians belonging to other school–such as vātala, pittala and śleṣmala. [15]

48 C.S. - I
