348                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

in the decoction of viḍaṅga and dried in the sun. The process should be repeated
twenty one times. Thereafter pounding it in a mortar and again grinding it finely on
stone slab one should keep it in a tub and sprinkling the viḍaṅga decoction over it
again and again one should press it with hands. During this process, whatever oil
comes out, should be collected by hands and kept in a clean and strong jar which
should be stored in a protected place. [23-24]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on tilwakoddālaka]

Now ask (the patient) to bring two boluses of 40 gm. weight of the finely made
paste of tilwaka and uddālaka with the decoction of viḍaṅga. Two similar boluses
of śyāmā and trivṛtā in half quantity (20 gm.) two boluses of dantī and dravantī in
further half quantity (10 gm.) and two boluses of cavya and citraka in further half
quantity (5 gm.) Combining all the above material with viḍaṅga decoction in quantity
of 1.28 litre and viḍaṅgataila in that of 640 ml. and mixing well one should keep it
in a big vessel which should be put on fire. A person sitting comfortably on a seat
and keeping eye constantly on the oil from all sides should cook it on mild fire while
stirring with a laddle constantly. When one observes that sound is stopped, foam is
subsided, oil is clarified, proper smell, colour and taste appear, the drug-paste pressed
with the fingers is made into a wick, not adhering to the fingers and not being too
soft or too hard. This is the time for bringing down the vessel. After the vessel is
brought down and cooled, the content should be filtered through undamaged cloth
and kept in a clean and strong jar closed with a lid and covered with a piece of white
cloth and tied well with threads should be stored in a protected place. Appropriate
dose of this should be administered to the patient by which he should be managed as said before.
Then at appropriate time, unctuous enema should be administered to him. By the
