358                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on prejudiced congregation]

The prejudiced congregation consisting of persons endowed with learning, under-
standing, speaking and contradiction or of ignorant ones, one should never discuss
with anybody. In the ignorant congregation, however, if it is friendly or neutral, one
should discuss with another who is devoid of learning, understanding, speaking
and contradiction, is not famous and is despised by great men. While discussing with
such a person one should use long sentences having incomprehensible and long
aphorisms, should ridicule the opponent again and again with movements of
hands before the gathering and should not give opportunity to him to speak, while
using difficult words one should remind the opponent that he is not speaking or
his proposition does not stand. Again calling him one should say–"You should learn
for one year more, perhaps you have not learnt from a preceptor or it is sufficient for
you. The opponent, even defeated once, is taken as defeated and should not be enter-
tained again. Some say that the same method is applicable in case of hostile discus-
sion with a superior opponent but, in fact, confrontation with a superior person is not
at all desirable. [20]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on inferior opponent]

One should discuss with an inferior or equal opponent in a friendly congregation.
In a neutral congregation he should pay attention, hearing, learning, understanding, power
of speaking and contradiction one should carefully weigh the strength and weakness
of the opponent. If he is stronger then he should not continue discussion giving it up
without any apparent sign but where the opponent is weak he should be subdued
immediately; the means adopted to subdue the inferior opponent immediately are
these such as–one having no scriptural knowledge be defeated by quoting
long aphorisms, one devoid of understanding by sentences with incomprehensible
and long aphorisms, one devoid of imagination with similar sentences having various
meanings, one devoid of power of speaking by contradicting the half-said sentence,
one devoid of skill by putting him in embarrassing situation, one with irritability by
teasing him, one with cowardice by terrorising, one devoid of carefulness by imposing
discipline. Thus by these means one should subdue the inferior opponent immediately. [21]
