366                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Repetition is of two types–semantic repetition and verbal repetition. The former
consists of the repetition of the same idea by different words such as bheṣaja, auṣadha
and sādhana (for therapy) and the latter consists of the repetition of the same word
such 'bheṣaja, bheṣaja'. Meaninglessness is that where there is only jumble of alphabets
devoid of any sense. Deprivation of meaning is due to lack of mutual connection of
otherwise meaningful words such as–cakra-na(ta)kravaṃśa-vajra-niṣākara.
Incongruity is considered in relation to illustration, theory and convention. Instance
and theory have already been described earlier. Now convention is of three types–
Āyurvedic, ritual and ethical. Āyurvedic convention such as on four-legged therapy,
ritual convention such as animals are to be sacrificed by sacrificing persons, ethical
convention such as non-violence towards all creatures. The statement incongruous
in respect of the respective convention is taken as incongruity. Thus are the syntactical
defects. [54]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Vākyapraśaṃsā]

Vākyapraśaṃsā–Vākyapraśaṃsā (syntactical commendability) is that where the
statement is free from deficiency, superfluity, is meaningful, devoid of deprivation of
meaning and incongruity, and comprehensible. Further there is no room for any
question. Such statement is commen' ded. [55]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Chala]

Chala–Chala (knavery or deceitful disputation) is only a jugglary of words in
which the words are used knavishly, with apparent meaning or without meaning. This
is of two types–Vākchala (verbal knavery) and Sāmānya chala (knavery in general).
Verbal knavery–such as, if somebody says–'this physician is 'navatantra', then the
physician retorts–I have no 'nava' (nine) texts but have only one. Then the other says–
'I am not saying that you have got nine texts but your practice in the same is 'Nava'
(new). On this the physician says–'I have not practised the text newly but many
times. This is verbal knavery. Knavery in general–such as, when somebody says–
'medicament is for alleviating the disease'. The other says–'How do you say the existent
