VIII]                         VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  375

strength and morbidity. The variations in quantity of drugs according to the degree
of morbidity depend on the degree of strength, because if intensely potent drug is
administered suddenly by a physician having not examined properly, it may kill the
weak patient; the weak patients are not able to bear intensely potent drugs which are
predominant in agni and vāyu or cauterization, application of alkali and surgical
operation. They may cause instantaneous death due to unbearable and over-intense
impulse of the drug. Keeping this in mind, the physicians treat the weak patients
with drugs which are unharmful, mild, delicate, heavy in progressive order, without
complication, and not creating any emergent condition, particularly ladies, because
they have unstable, soft, bare and timid heart, are mostly delicate, weak and
subordinate to others. On the other hand, the drug having low potency and applied
by one who had not examined properly in strong patients having severe disoders
becomes ineffective. Hence the patient should be examined in respect of prakṛti
(constitution), vikṛti (morbidity), sāra (constitution of dhātus), saṃhanana
(compactness), pramāṇa (measurement), sātmya (suitability), sattva (psyche),
āharaṣakti (power of intake and digestion of food), vyāyāmaṣakti (power of exercise)
and age for the knowledge of the degree of strength. [94]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on prakṛti]

Now, (I) shall explain the factors prakṛti etc. such as–the body of the foetus
is determined by the constitution of sperm and ovum, that of time and uterus, that
of food and behaviour of the mother and that of the products of mahābhūtas.
Doṣa, one or more than one, which predominates in these factors, gets attached to
the foetus. This is said as 'doṣaprakṛti' (physical or doṣika constitution) of human
beings emerged from the initial stage of foetus. Hence some persons are constitu-
tionally śleṣmala (having predominance of śleṣma), some pittala, some vātala, some
having combined doṣas and some with balanced dhātus. Their characters are described
(hereafter). [95]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on śleṣmala]
