VIII]                         VIMĀNASTHĀNA                                  383

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on age]

One should also examine in respect of age. Age is defined as the state of body
corresponding to the length of time. Age is broadly divided into three stages–child-
hood, middle age and old age. Childhood is determined upto sixteen years when the
dhātus are immature, sexual characters are not manifested, the body is delicate,
unenduring, with incomplete strength and predominant in kapha dhātu. This again
with dhātus in developing stage and unstable mind remains upto thirty years. The
middle age is characterized by strength, energy, virility, prowess, acquisition, reten-
tion, recollection, speech, understanding and qualities of all dhātus having reached
the normal limit; with proper physical and mental strength, without degeneration in
qualities of dhātus, with predominance of pitta dhātu and is upto sixty years. There-
after is the old age upto one hundred years. During this period dhātus, sense organs,
strength, energy, virility, prowess, acquisition, retention, recollection, speech and
understanding gradually degenerate, qualities of dhātus go down and there is pre-
dominance of vāyu. During this age, the measure of life-span is one hundred years.
There are persons who live longer or shorter than that, in such cases, one should
determine the three divisions of age on the basis of strength of the factors like prakṛti
etc. (except vikṛti) and also characters of different periods of life-span. [122]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on examination of age]

Thus one should determine the strength of the entities like Prakṛti etc. (except
vikṛti) in three divisions–superior, medium and inferior. According to severity of
vikṛti (morbidity) the three degrees of strength of doṣas are inferred. Then dividing
the medicament also into three degree, e.g. strong, mild and moderate, one should
apply them according to doṣas. [123]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on āyus]

आयुषः: प्रमाणज्ञानहेतोः: पुनर्निर्दिक्ष्ये जातिसूत्रीये च लक्षणानुपदेक्ष्यन्ते ॥१२४॥
