398                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

which is earlier knower or the body itself? because without earlier existence of
the knowable body there can not be knower of the same and if the earlier existence of
the body is accepted, then the knower of the same would be reduced as non-eternal.
When there is no other doner whose witness is he? How be there the variations of
painful sensation in one devoid of abnormality? O Lord! Out of the three–past, present
and future–which of the painful sensations of the patient is treated by physician? The
reason of the doubt is that the future one has not yet reached, the past one has already
passed and the present one also is not stationary. What is the cause of the sensation
and its substratum? Where do all these sensations cease completely? By what signs is
known the omniscient, detached from all, free from all the conjunctions, one,
calm, the self of the creatures? Having heard the queries of Agniveśa, Punarvasu,
the best among the wise and with the calm self, replied properly in respect of all of
them. [3-15]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on six aggregations]

The aggregate of five mahābhūtas and consciousness as the sixth one is known
as 'Puruṣa' (person). Consciousness alone is also known as 'Puruṣa'. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on personal self constituents]

Again from division of constituents he is known as possessing twenty four enti-
ties such as mind, ten sense organs, five sense objects and prakṛti (matter) consisting
of eight entities (Avyakta, mahat, ahaṅkāra and five tanmātrās). [17]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on mind]

Mind is defined as the entitity which, even on contact with self, sense organs and
sense objects, is responsible for production or otherwise of knowledge by its attend-
ing or non-attending respectively. Subtleness and oneness are known as two qualities
of mind. [18-19]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on object of mind]

The object of thinking, analysing, reasoning, meditating, determination and what-
ever, is to be perceived by mind is its object. Action of mind consists of control over
senses, self-restraint, reasoning, analyzing. Beyond that is the jurisdiction of buddhi
(intellect). [20-21]
