420                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

The self also does not produce himself. Because in that case the question would
arise whether the self does it while born or unborn and in both ways it is untenable.
Because the born self can't produce himself as he is already there and the un-
born one would do as he is non-existing, hence in both ways it is illogical. More-
over, suppose, the self is capable of producing himself, why does he not give birth only
in desired species and also as endowed with supreme power, unobstructed movements,
power of taking forms at pleasure, brilliance, strength, speed, complexion, psyche
and compactness and also as devoid of old age, disease and death, because the self
wants himself to be like this or even better. (3)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on suitability]

The embryo is also not caused by suitability because if it were so, the persons
using suitable things alone should get progeny and not the other hand, those using
unsuitable things should be wholly childless but both are seen in both cases. (4)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on nutrition]

The embryo is also not caused by nutrition because if it were so, the persons
using nutrition alone should produce themself, on the other hand, those eating
unsuitable things should be wholly childless but both are seen in both cases. [5]

[Devanagari unclear: long verses on causal relation]

The embryo has also no causal relation with nutrition because in that case
none of the men and women should be childless as there is none who does not take
nutrition. If it is meant that excellence of nutrition produces embryo, then the
persons using the meat of goat, sheep, deer and peacock, cowmilk, curd, ghee,
honey, oil, rocksalt, sugarcane juice, green gram and śali rice alone should get
offsprings; and those eating śyāmāka, varaka, uddālaka, koradūṣaka, tubers and
roots (inferior cereals and edibles) should be wholly childless. But both are seen
in both cases. (5)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on psyche]

Not also the psyche descends from the other world into the embryo because in
that case nothing of the past life should be unknown, unheard or unseen but it does
not remember anything. (6)

[Devanagari unclear: verse on Bharadvāja's conclusion]

Therefore, I say–the embryo is not produced of mother, father, self,
suitability, nutrition and the psyche is also not associated in this (thus said
Bharadvāja). [4]
