426                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

Ātreya replied–It is already said earlier that the psyche associated with the life-
principle comes in contact with the body. How the embryo is formed in human shape
from the aggreggate and man is born of a man is explained hereunder. There are four
types of genetic source of animals–Jarāyu (foetal memberances), egg, sweat and
coming out of the earth. Of these four classes, each class has innumerable variations
because of innumerable shapes of creatures. In cases of viviparous and oviparous
animals, these procreative factors attain the shape according to the species where
they operate. For instance, gold, silver, copper, tin and lead poured into respective
moulds of beewax (make various products), when they are poured into the man-
shaped mould the product will be in the human form. In the same way, the embryo
produced from the aggreggate attains the human form. It is observed that man is
born of a man because of his belonging to the human species. [16]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on dull etc.]

As to the query that if man is born of a man why the offsprings of the dull etc. are
not similar to their parents it is said that in the seed (sperm or ovum), the part of the
body which is damaged in its genetic source gets abnormality otherwise not. Hence
both types of cases are observed. The sense organs of all are self derived and their
presence or absence is dependent on fate. Therefore, the offsprings of the dull etc. are
not invariably similar to their parents. [17]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on conscious in presence of sense organs]

This is not a fact that the self is conscious in presence of sense organs otherwise
not because the self is never dissociated with the psyche and from a particular psyche
a particular knowledge is acquired. [18]

भवन्ति चात्र–

Here are the verses–

[Devanagari unclear: verse on action]

The agent can not proceed for knowledge and consequent action in absence of
sense organs. The action which is dependent on certain entities do not exist without
them such as the potter is helpless in his action, inspite of his knowledge, in absence
of earth. [19]
