IV]                           ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   429

(Now) the order in which the embryo is formed is explained. After the accumu-
lated menstrual blood is discharged and the new one is situated, the woman having
cleanly bathed and with undamaged genital passage, ovum and uterus is called as
having opportune period. When the man having undamaged sperms cohabits with such
a woman, his semen, the essence of all the śarīradhātus, is extracted from the whole
body impelled by orgasm. Thus being impelled by the self in the form of orgasm and
also seated by him, the semen having potentiality of a seed, is ejaculated from the
man's body and through the proper path enters into the uterus and combines with
the ovum. [7]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on consciousness]

There, first of all, the principle of consciousness comes forward alongwith psy-
che to active the qualities of mahābhūtas. He is hetu, kāraṇa, nimitta (cause), akṣara
(un-decaying), kartā (doer), mantā (thinker), veditā (perceptor), boddhā (knower),
draṣṭā (seer), dhārtā (sustainer), brahmā (creator) viśwarkarmā (performing universal
function), viśwarūpa (taking universal forms), puruṣa (lying in the body), prabhava
(source of origin) avyaya (undamagable), nitya (eternal), guṇī (having qualities),
grahaṇa (receiver), (pradhāna (principal), avyakta (umanifest), jīva (life-principle),
Jña (conscious), pudgala (ego), cetanāvān (having sensation), vibhu (omnipresent),
bhūtātmā (essence of creatures), indriyātmā (essence of sense organs) and antarātmā
(inner essense). At the time of receiving the qualities, he, first of all, takes up ākāśa.
As the undecaying self with desire to create the beings at the end of the final
destruction (of creation) creates, with the psyche as instrument, first of all, ākāśa
thereafter gradually the other four elements vāyu etc. having more manifest qualities.
At the time of putting on the body also he takes up ākāśa itself first of all and then
the other four elements vāyu etc. with more manifest qualities gradually. The entire
process of receiving the qualities of mahābhūtas by uniting with them is completed
within a subtle measure of time. [8]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on first month]
