IV]                           ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   431

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on simultaneous appearance]

Thus the sense organs and other body parts appear simultaneously except those
entities which come forth after birth such as–teeth, secondary sex characters, mani-
festation of sex characters and other similar entities. This is the normal pattern other-
wise abnormal. In the foetus, some entities are permanent while others are temporary.
His body parts which are manifested carry the features of female, male or enench.
The characteristic features of female and male depend on the self or the mahābhūtas
and are determined according to the dominance of one or the other factor such as–
want of valour, timidity, lack of skill, confusion, instability, heaviness in lower parts,
intolerance, laxity, tenderness, genetic factor for uterus and other similar entities de-
termine the female sex, contrary to these determine the male sex, the characteristics
of both types denote the enuch. [14]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on consciousness in foetus]

The foetus attains the free flow of consciousness in his mind at the very time
when the sense organs are manifested. Hence from then onwards the foetus pulsates
and expresses the desire for whatever is experienced in the previous life, this is called
by the elders as the state of two hearts. His heart which is maternally derived gets
connected with the mother's heart through vessels carrying nutrition. Hence their
desire is transmitted through them. Due to this reason it is not desirable to ignore
the (desire of) foetus expressed through the mother. In case the same are ignored,
there may be destruction or morbidity (in foetus). At this stage, the mother be-
comes equal to the foetus for acquisition and maintenance in respect of certain
things. Therefore, the one who manage the pregnant (lady) with liked and wholesome
things. [15]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on management of pregnant women]
