V]                            ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                  441

lustre, Marut enthusiasm, Viśvadeva all sense organs and their objects, darkness ig-
norance, light knowledge; as initial creation in case of the universe so impregration in
the Person, kṛtayuga childhood, tretā youth, dwāpara old age, kali illness and end of
creation death. Thus by inference commonness of other unmentioned entities of the
universe and the Person may also be known. [5]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on commonness]

After Lord Ātreya concluded his talk, Agniveśa asked–Whatever your lordship
said about commonness between the universe and the Person is quite correct. (kindly
tell us) What is the purpose of describing the commonness? [6]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on cause of universe]

Lord Ātreya said–O Agniveśa! listen to me. Seeing the entire universe in the Self
and vice versa gives rise to turn knowledge. On seeing the entire universe in his Self
one realises (the truth) that self alone is the agent of happiness and misery and none
else. Though associated with cause etc. under the influence of previous actions, after
realising the identity of the Self with the universe, he rises for salvation. Here the
word 'Loka' denotes combination, ordinarily the entire universe is the aggregate of
six constituents. [7]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on hetu and stages of transformation]

It has got a hetu and stages of transformation such as utpatti, vṛddhi, upaplava
and viyoga. Hetu is the cause of birth; utpatti is birth, vṛddhi is growth and develop-
ment, upaplava is advent of afflictions and viyoga is disjunction of the six constitu-
ents also known as passing away of the life-principle, cessation of vital breath, break-
ing away, reverting to the natural state. The root cause of the universe as well as the
advent of all miseries is inclination to (worldly affairs) while going away from them
leads to their cessation. Inclination is misery and disinclination happiness. This
knowledge, which comes forth, is true. This is possible from the knowledge of the
commonness with the entire universe. This is the purpose of describing the com-
monness. [8]

61 C.S. - I
