462                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

First of all both man and woman should undergo unction and fomentation and
thereafter purify themselves by emesis and purgation so that they come gradually to
normalcy. Thereafter they should apply non-unctuous and unctuous enema. Then the
man should be managed with ghee and milk cooked with sweet drugs and the woman
with oil and black gram. [4]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on three menstrual nights]

After the onset of menstruation, for three days and nights, the woman should
observe celibacy, should sleep on the ground, take food with hands from an un-
broken utensil and should not cleanse her body in any way. On the fourth day, she
should be annointed and bathed from head and provided with white apparel
alongwith the man. Now both the partners wearing white apparel and garland, with
pleasant disposition and loving each other should enter into sexual intercourse on
even day after both if they desire male child or on odd days if they desire female
child. [5]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on coitus]

In case the woman is not in proper coitus with the female partner in her bending down or
side position. In the former, vāyu being strong inflicts the genital track and in the
latter, if she is on her right side, kapha coming down blocks the uterus or if on her
left side pitta situated there afflicts both ovum and sperm with burning. Hence she
should receive the seed (semen) while in supine position because in that condition
doṣas remain in their normal position. After the act is completed, she should be sprin-
kled with cold water. The woman subjected to over-eating, hunger, thirst, fear, de-
traction, grief, anger or having desire for other man or excessive coitus does not con-
ceive or gives birth to abnormal child. One should avoid the woman too young, too
old, suffering from prolonged illness or afflicted with any other disorder. These very
defects are also in man. Hence man and woman should join together when they are
free from all the defects.
