464                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

this method for a week, on the eight day after taking bath from head she should put
on undamaged white clothes and wear white garlands and ornaments. [9]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on rite preparation]

Then, first of all, the priest should select a place in the north of the house and
having slope towards east or north. The located place should be pasted with cowdung
and water and after sprinkling with water an altar should be made. On its west side,
the priest should take his seat on an undamaged cotton cushion or the hide of a white
bull in case of a brāhmaṇa, on the hide of a tiger or a bullock in case of a kṣatriy a
and on that of a deer or a goat in case of a vaiśya. Having sit there he should collect
the sticks of palāśa, iṅgudī, udumbara or madhūka near the fire, spread the kuśa
grass, delimit with the boundary sticks and scatter the fried paddy grains, white and
fragrant flowers. Then he should make the water vessel purified with sacred (mantras),
process the ghee for oblation and place the horse etc. of the said complexion around
the place. [10]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on Prajāpati rite]

Then the woman expecting a son according to her desire should perfrom the
rites alongwith her husband, taking her seat in the west of the fire and south of
the priest. Then the priest pointing towards Prajāpati should perform the desire-
fulfilling rite in the genital parts of the expectant woman with the recitation of
mantras as 'viṣṇur yoniṃ' etc. in order to fulfil her desire. Then he should pre-
pare the bolus after cooking it in an earthen vessel and offer as oblation to the
fire thrice according to prescribed method. He should further give her the water
pot purified with sacred mantras for all purposes of water. After the rite is com-
pleted she should go round the fire along-with her husband first using her right
leg. Then, after the brāhmaṇas have invocated blessings, the man should drink
the remaining ghee and then the women without leaving any portion. There-
after they should join together in sexual intercourse for eight nights while using the
said clothes etc. Thus they procreate a son according to desire. [11]
