VIII]                        ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   469

foetus. Immediately after the appearance of bleeding she should be advised to lie
down on a bed covered with soft, comfortable, cooling bedsheet keeping her head
slightly lower. Then a cotton swab soaked with (the powder of) yaṣṭīmadhu and ghee
which are kept in very cold water should be applied on the perineal region. She
should also be annoited with ghee washed one hundred times or one thousand times
all over below the navel. Similarly, she should be sprinkled over with quite cold
cowmilk or decoction of yaṣṭīmadhu or the plants of nyagrodhādi group in the region
below the navel or she should take cold bath in a tub. Cloth pieces soaked with the
juice of astringent plants having latex should be put inside the vagina, cotton swab
of milk and ghee cooked with the leaf-buds of the nyagrodhādi trees should be kept
inside the vagina. She should also take orally 10 gm. of these preparations of ghee
extracted from milk alone. She should take as lickable the stamens of lotus, utpala
and kumuda (types of waterlily) mixed with honey and sugar. She should eat water
chestnut, lotus seeds and kaśeruka. She should take gandhapriyaṅgu, nīlotpala, lotus
roots, unripe fruits of udumbara and leaf buds of banyan tree alongwith goat's milk.
She should eat soft, fragrant and cooked rice of red śāli added with honey and sugar
alongwith milk cooked with roots of balā, atibalā, śāli, ṣaṣṭika and sugarcane and
kākolī or she should eat the above rice alongwith the meat soup of common quail,
grey partridge, kuraṅga, śambara, hariṇa, eṇa and kālapucchaka (types of deer) and
rabbit well-seasoned with ghee while seated in a comfortable, cool and sufficiently
airy place. She should be protected from anger, grief, exertion, sexual intercourse
and physical exercise and should be entertained with soothing and favourite stories.
Thus the foetus is stabilised. [24]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on āma]

If the bleeding is associated with āma often it causes damage to the foetus be-
cause of their contradictory treatments. [25]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on ineffective bleeding]

If a pregnant women uses hot and sharp things and due to this bleeding or
another discharge ensues from vagina when the foetus has gained sufficient stre-
ngth, it does not develop further because of having been discharged. It stays for long
