VIII]                        ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   475

look, taste and smell. The door should be facing to the east or the north. It should be
made of the wood from bilva, tinduka, iṅguda, bhallātaka, varuṇa or khadira or other
trees recommended by the brāhmaṇas well-versed in Atharvaveda. It should have
excellent living space, plastering, roofing and door pans and should be provided
with, by a good architect, fireplace, water store, place for wooden mortar, lavatory,
bathroom and kitchen. The home should be comfortable for all the seasons. [33]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on furnishings]

The materning home should be equipped with the following drugs and appli-
ances–ghee, oil, honey, rock salt, sauvarcalā, kāla and biḍa salts, vidaṅga, kuṣṭha,
devadāru, śuṇṭhī, pippalī, pippalimūla, gajapippalī, maṇḍūkaparṇī, elā, lāṅgalī, vacā,
cavya, citraka, hiṅgu, sarṣapa, laśuna, kaṭaka, kaṇakanikā, nīpa, atasī, balwajā,
bhūrja, kulattha, maireya, surā and āsava (types of wine), two stone slabs, two pes-
tles, two mortars, one untamed bull, two sharp golden and silver needles, sharp in-
struments made of steel, two cots made of bilwa wood, fuel of the wood of tinduka
and iṅguda. Apart from these appliances, there should be many multipara women
possessing friendliness, constant attachment, good manners, presence of mind, af-
fectionate nature, freedom from anxiety, endurance and favourable disposition.
Brāhmaṇas well-versed in Atharvaveda should also be there. Besides these, what-
ever is deemed as necessary or advised by the brāhmaṇas and the elderly women
should be provided there. [34]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on auspicious day]

In ninth month after pregnancy she should be made to enter into the labour
room on a auspicious day in conjunction with an auspicious star and in auspicious karaṇa and
muhūrta offering pacificatory oblations to the fire, cow, brāhmaṇa, fire and
water should be made to enter first. The grasses and water alongwith honey should
