VIII]                        ŚĀRĪRASTHĀNA                                   479

adhered placenta alongwith flatus, urine and stool because vāyu does not tend to
move contrarily. Flatus, urine and stool and other internal excrements cause adherance
of placenta. [41]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on protective measures]

While the steps are being taken to expel the placenta, the following actions should
be performed in respect of the newly born child, such as–rubbing of stone pieces at
the root of the ears, sprinkling of cold or hot water over the face, thus he recovers the
vital breath stopped due to distress so far. If the foetus is devoid of movements, he
should be fanned with a winnowing basket having black flaps till he recovers. (all the
above measures may be employed). When he recovers the breath and becomes nor-
mal, he should be bathed and cleaned well with water.

[Devanagari unclear: verse on cleaned and bathed]

Thereafter, his palate, lips, throat and tongue should be cleansed with the help
of a finger having nail well-cut and putting a well-washed, cushioned cotton swab.
After washing his mouth, his anterior fontanel in head should be covered with a
cotton swab soaked in some fatty substance. Then vomiting should be induced by
administering ghee added with rock salt. [42-43]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on cord cutting]

Thereafter, his palate, lips, throat and tongue should be cleansed with the help
of a finger having nail well-cut and putting a well-washed, cushioned cotton swab.
After fixing the point at eight fingers from the umbilical attachment the cutting point
should be held tightly on both sides and cut with a sharp, half-edged instrument made
of gold, silver or steel. The end of the attached portion should be tied with thread and
attached loosely to the neck of the foetus. If the cut portion suppurates, it should be
massaged with the oil prepared with the paste of lodhra, madhuka, priyaṅgu, devadāru
and haridrā. The powder of the above drugs may also be applied over the part. Thus
the processing of the cord is described well. [44]
