506                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

laughing, loudly moves naked towards the south or to a dense forest alongwith a dog;
in dream the vision of persons wearing ochre-coloured garments; ghastly appearance,
naked, carrying stick, black-complexioned and red-eyed is not regarded as auspicious.
The dream of a woman–black-complexioned, sinner, characterless, with long
hairs, nails and breast, devoid of cosmetics, garaland and apparel–is just like the night
of death.

These are the severe dreams which indicate the death of a patient while one de-
void of illness, in rare cases, escapes even after reaching the doubtful point. [27-40]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on prodromal dreams]

A person sees severe dreams in critical period due to filling up of mind-carrying
channels by exceedingly powerful three doṣas. A person comes across various fruitful
or fruitless dreams in subconscious stage because of the mind leading the sense or-
gans. [41-42]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on six categories]

Dream is known as of seven types such as–based on (1) visual experience, (2)
auditory experience, (3) other experience, (4) strong desire, (5) imagination, (6) fu-
ture consequences and (7) doṣas. [43]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on fruitful and fruitless dreams]

Out of them, the first five are fruitless and also those experienced in day, and
which are too short or too long. The dream experienced in early hours of night yields
small result, if one does not sleep again after experiencing the dream, it is highly and
immediately fruitful. If after experiencing an inauspicious dream one sees again a
soothing and auspicious dreams just afterwards–it yields good result. [44–46]

तत्र श्लोकः–

[Devanagari unclear: summing verse]

Now the summing up verse–

The physician who knows these severe prodromal signs and dreams, does not
take up the incurable cases due to ignorance. [47]

इत्यग्निवेशकृते तन्त्रे चरकप्रतिसंस्कृते इन्द्रियस्थाने पूर्वरूपीयमिन्द्रियं
नाम पञ्चमोऽध्यायः ॥५॥

Thus ends the fifth chapter on prodromal signs in Indriyasthāna in the
treatise composed by Agniveśa and redacted by Caraka. (5)

                                  •
