XI]                           INDRIYASTHĀNA                                  521

If the extremities and the face are dried up or swollen without the main trunk of
the body, it indicates death of the patient within a month.

Appearance of a crescent-shaped blue streak in forehead, head or pelvic region
indicates death of the patient within a month.

The patient in whose body masūrikā (chicken pox) errupts like coral beads and
disappear instantaneously, dies soon.

If be patient having severe pressing pain in neck, glossitis and inflammation in
inguinal glands, mouth and throat should be regarded as ripened (for death).

Excessive giddiness, delirium and breaking pain in bones–these three symptoms
appear in a patient having loose of death (in his neck).

If a patient after fainting pulls out his hairs and is weak inspite of taking too
much food like a healthy person should be taken as one impelled by death. [12-17]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on sense organ disturbances]

The patient who searches for his fingers and hands putting them before his eyes
and smiles while having his eyes directed upwards and unblinking should be taken
as blinded by death. The patient who being confused searches for something non-
existing in bed, seat, body parts wooden furniture or wall should be taken as impelled
by (death) time. [18-19]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on patient]

If a patient, due to mental confusion, laughs irrelevantly, licks his lips and has
feet, hands and breathing as cold does not survive.

A patient having his mind covered with great tamas (the principle of ignorance)
does not perceive even though looking at their hairs or attendants who are calling him
from nearby. [20-21]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on mahābhūtas]

The wise physician finding absence and excess of ākāśa etc. (mahābhūtas) si-
multaneously in the patient's body should not prescribe medicines. [22]

[Devanagari unclear: verse on diseases aggravation]

When diseases aggravate severely and mental strength deteriorates, the owner
of the body (self) leaves his abode known as 'deha' (body).

At the approaching death, complexion, voice, power of digestion, strength of
speech, sense organs and mind–all these diminish, and sleep comes ever or never.
[23-24]

71 C.S. - I
