524                           CARAKA-SAṂHITĀ                             [CH

The physician seeing the arrived messenger as dishevelled or naked or weeping
or unattentive should predict the death of the patient.

If the messengers come while the physician is asleep or cutting or breaking
(something), the physician should not accompany them to their master (the patient).

If the messengers arrive when the physician is offering oblations to the fire or
bolus to the forefathers, it indicates death of the patient.

If messengers arrive when the physician is speaking or thinking about inauspi-
cious things, the patient dies.

If the messengers arrive when the physician is thinking or speaking about the
dead, burnt or lost or other inauspicious things, it indicates patient's death.

If the messenger comes in a place or a time similar to the disease in properties,
the physician should not treat the patient.

The messengers as anxious, frightened, hurried, terrorised and unclean; unchaste
women, three in number, having deformities, or enunch indicate death of the patient.

If a physician observes a messenger having trouble in some organ, ascetic, dis-
eased or engaged in harsh activities, he should not go with him.

If a messenger of the patient comes on a cart carried by ass or camel, it indicates
the patient's succumbing to death.

Before meeting (while waiting for) the physician, if the messenger touches straw,
chaff, flesh, bone, hairs, body hairs, nail, teeth, broom, pounding rod, winnowing
basket, shoes, fallen leather, grass, wood, husk, charcoal, earthen cold or stone, it
indicates death of the patient.

If the physician comes across bad omen while the messenger is conveying the
message about the patient, the physician should not go with him.

If the physician, before, during or after receiving the message from the messen-
ger, sees somebody diseased, dead or adorned like a dead, or something broken, burnt
or destroyed; hears similar words, perceives intensely pungent taste or stinky smell
like that of corpse or exceedingly harsh touch or other inauspicious entities it indi-
cates death of the patient. Thus the topic about the messengers of the dying patients is
described. [9-24]

[Devanagari unclear: long verse on portentous signs]
